JOANNE MARTIN
An Oral History
conducted by Allison Tracy

STANFORD HISTORICAL SOCIETY ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM

Stanford University
©2015

2

Joanne Martin

3

4

Contents
Introduction

p. 7

Abstract

p. 9

Biography

p. 11

Interview Transcript

p. 15

Curriculum Vitae

p. 75

Index

p. 97

5

6

Introduction
This oral history was conducted by the Stanford Historical Society Oral History Program, in
collaboration with the Stanford University Archives. The program is under the direction of
the Oral History Committee of the Stanford Historical Society.
The Stanford Historical Society Oral History Program furthers the Society’s mission “to
foster and support the documentation, study, publication, dissemination, and preservation of
the history of the Leland Stanford Junior University.” The program explores the institutional
history of the University, with an emphasis on the transformative post-WWII period,
through interviews with leading faculty, staff, alumni, trustees, and others. The interview
recordings and transcripts provide valuable additions to the existing collection of written and
photographic materials in the Stanford University Archives.
Oral history is not a final, verified, or complete narrative of events. It is a unique, reflective,
spoken account, offered by the interviewee in response to questioning, and as such it may be
deeply personal. Each oral history is a reflection of the past as the interviewee remembers
and recounts it. But memory and meaning vary from person to person; others may recall
events differently. Used as primary source material, any one oral history will be compared
with and evaluated in light of other evidence, such as contemporary texts and other oral
histories, in arriving at an interpretation of the past. Although the interviewees have a past or
current connection with Stanford University, they are not speaking as representatives of the
University.
Each transcript is edited by program staff and by the interviewee for grammar, syntax, and
occasional inaccuracies and to aid in overall clarity and readability, while maintaining the
substantive content of the interview as well as the interviewee’s voice. As a result of this
editing process, the transcript does not match the recording verbatim. In the rare case that a
substantive deletion has been made, this is indicated at the relevant place on the transcript.
Any substantive additions are noted in brackets or by footnote.

7

All uses of the interview transcript and recording are covered by a legal agreement between
Joanne Martin and the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University
(“Stanford”). The copyright to the transcript and recording, including the right to publish, is
reserved by Stanford University.
The transcript and recording are freely made available for non-commercial purposes, with
proper citation provided in print or electronic publication. No part of the transcript and
recording may be used for commercial purposes without the written permission of the
Stanford University Archivist or his/her representative. Requests for commercial use should
be addressed to archivesref@stanford.edu and should indicate the items to be used, extent
of usage, and purpose.
This oral history should be cited as “Joanne Martin, Stanford Historical Society Oral History
Program Interviews (SC0932). Department of Special Collections & University Archives,
Stanford University Libraries, Stanford, Calif.”

8

Abstract
Joanne Martin begins her interview reflecting on her early life in Massachusetts, her family
and her pre-college education. She recounts her formative experience at Smith College and
her transition into a workforce that discriminated against women. She details working her
way up to being a director at McBer & Company as well as the unfair wage gap she
encountered at the company. Martin continues on to describe her journey towards earning
her PhD in social psychology from Harvard and her dissertation on the topic of inequality.
Martin then recalls her move to the Stanford Business School and delves into her research
and teaching experiences. She speaks of the trailblazing women before her, including Myra
Strober, Diane Middlebrook, Liz Cohen and Nan Keohane, and the time she spent as the
only woman on the faculty in the Business School. She goes on to discuss the prejudice she
faced while teaching, the discrimination related committees she was selected to serve on, and
her work towards tenure. She notes how she balanced her teaching and research with her
family and social life at Stanford. Martin describes her justice and inequality research and her
shift into gender research, as well as her growing interest in organizational culture and its
applications after mentoring Alan Wilkins, a PhD student. She also characterizes her
approach to mentoring students and her outreach for increasing the population of minority
students.
Martin discusses her involvement with the Clayman Institute, formerly CROW, and the
female faculty caucus. She speaks about her time on the Faculty Advisory Board and the
tenure review process on campus at the time.

9

10

Joanne Martin
Biography
Professor Martin obtained her B.A. degree in Art from Smith College in 1968. From 1968 to
1972 she worked for McBer and Co. (formerly the Behavioral Science Center of Sterling
Institute), designing and delivering training projects for Federal government agencies such as
the Peace Corps, the Office of Economic Opportunity, Department of Labor, and the
General Accounting Office, eventually being promoted to Director of Federal Government
Marketing. From 1972 to 1977 she earned a PhD in Social Psychology and Social Relations
from Harvard University. In 1977 she joined the faculty of Stanford University as an
Assistant Professor of Organizational Behavior in the Graduate School of Business. She
earned tenure at the business school in 1984, the first woman to do so in any field, and was
later named the Fred H. Merrill Professor of Organizational Behavior, with a courtesy
appointment in Sociology. In 2001 she was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Economics
and Business Administration from Copenhagen Business School. She received an Honorary
Doctorate in Social Sciences in 2005 from the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam.
Her PhD dissertation won several awards, including prizes from Sigma Xi (1976) and the
American Psychological Association, winning in the Industrial and Organizational Division
and chosen as a Finalist in the Social Issues Division (1977). She was awarded the Promising
Young Scholar award from the Western Academy of Management (1982), and the Gordon
Allport Intergroup Relations Prize for Research (1988). She was elected a Fellow of the
American Psychological Association, the American Psychological Society, and The Academy
of Management, and was chosen as the Ruffin Fellow of Business Ethics at the Darden
Graduate School of Business Administration, University of Virginia (1990). In 2000 she was
awarded the Centennial Medal from Harvard University, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, for research-based contributions to society. In that same year she also received the
Distinguished Educator Award from the Academy of Management. Professor Martin also
received the Journal of Management Inquiry Scholarly Career Achievement Award (2003)
and the Distinguished Scholar Career Achievement Award from the OMT Division of the
Academy of Management (2005). In 2007 the Joanne Martin Trailblazer Award was created

11

by the OMT division of the Academy of Management, to honor scholars who introduced
innovative research domains during the course of their careers.
Professor Martin has been elected to the Board of Governors of the Academy of
Management (1992-1995) and served on the Board of Directors of C.P.P., Inc. (1993-2003)
where she was a member of the Executive and Audit Committees and chaired the
Nomination and Compensation Committees. She was a member of the Advisory Board of
the International Who’s Who of Professional and Business Women (1998-2007) and the
Board of Advisors of the Silicon Valley Chapter of the National Association of Corporate
Directors (2000-2004). She was a member of the International Advisory Board of the
International Centre for Research in Organizational Discourse, Strategy, and Change, for the
Universities of Melbourne, Sydney, London and McGill (2000-2007). Professor Martin has
also served on the editorial boards of a dozen scholarly journals.
At the Graduate School of Business at Stanford, Professor Martin Served as PhD liaison for
her department (1978-1980 and 1986-1989), as Doctoral Director, with responsibility for all
seven of the school’s doctoral programs (1990-1995), and as Area Coordinator for the
Organizational Behavior Department (2000-2002). On the university level, her service began
in 1981 as a member of the University President’s Task Force on Affirmative Action,
followed by membership on the Provost’s Committee on Recruitment and Retention of
Women Faculty (1992-1993) and the Provost’s Diversity Council for Faculty Matters in
2002-2005. In 1995-1997 she was elected to the seven-member University Advisory Board
that reviews all university tenure promotions and hires, as well as department closings,
faculty grievances, etc., serving as Secretary of the Board and Vice Chair. From 1995-2007
she was repeatedly elected to represent the Graduate School of the Business in the Faculty
Senate. Her interdisciplinary commitments across Stanford included a courtesy appointment
in the Department of Sociology, and involvement as an Advisory Board member and/or
faculty affiliate of the Center for Research on Women and Gender, the Organizations and
Mental Health Program, the Stanford Center for Research on Organizations, Feminist
Studies, the Center for Social Innovation, and the Research Institute of Comparative Race
and Ethnicity.

12

Professor Martin’s research focuses on three domains: patterns of income inequality and the
perception of injustice, the study of organizations as cultures, and gender issues in
organizations. She has published over 50 articles and five books, including Cultures in
Organizations (Oxford University Press, 1992) and Organizational Culture: Mapping the
Terrain (invited volume in the Foundation for Organizational Sciences Series, Sage, 2002).
She retired in 2007, becoming the first Emerita Professor of the Graduate School of
Business.

13

14

STANFORD UNIVERSITY

PROJECT:

STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT

INTERVIEWER:

ALLISON TRACY

INTERVIEWEE:

JOANNE MARTIN

DATE OF INTERVIEW:

MAY 28, 2015

Tracy: This is Allison Tracy. It’s May 28, 2015. I’m here with Joanne Martin to
conduct an interview for the Stanford Historical Society Oral History
Program. This interview will be a part of our Pioneering Women Oral
History Project. We are in a conference room in the Graduate School of
Business. Joanne, to start out, can you tell me a little bit about where you
were born and where you grew up?
Martin: [00:00:24] I was born on the coast of Massachusetts. I was born in Salem. I
grew up in the town next door, which was called Marblehead.
Tracy: Tell me a little bit about your parents.
Martin: [00:00:38] My father was a research scientist at Polaroid who did color film
stuff, and later on some CIA stuff about opening doors with bio… you
know, photos of fingertips and eyeballs. My mother was an art teacher in a
high school. She quit that when she got married. Very traditional.
Tracy: Do you have any siblings?
Martin: [00:01:10] Yes. I have a sister four years younger, Linda Ashton Martin, and a
brother two years younger. He was named after my father, Richard Drake
Martin.

15

Tracy: I want to talk a little bit about your education. Was there anything, in terms
of pre-college education, important to bring up, or notable about that time?
Martin: [00:01:56] At that time, the Sputnik educational revolution was happening,
and I was at a really good public school where they took thirty of us at age
eleven, separated us from everybody, and let us move through, first, high
school, and then college curricula, as fast as we could go. It was marvelous
education. By the end there were about fifteen out of the thirty still in the
program. We were doing college stuff for years. It was just a very good
education.
Tracy: Were you able to actually graduate high school any earlier than you normally
would have?
Martin: [00:02:38] No. The deal was, we would just graduate with a high school
degree. All these AP courses … it was in the early days of that kind of thing
so we were left to negotiate that with our colleges.
Tracy: Interesting.
Martin: [00:02:52] When I got to college I had decided I’d had enough of being a
brain [laughter], and I was going to learn to make friends and have a good
time. I never told them about any of the AP courses. I’m sure they helped me
get in, but I just coasted on what I already knew. I’d occasionally read
recommended readings, but I pretty much got through on what I’d already
been taught in a lot of the courses, and just had fun.
Tracy: You went to Smith College.
Martin: [00:03:24] Yes.
Tracy: Was there a particular reason you chose Smith?

16

Martin: [00:03:29] It didn’t have a math requirement. I had been given choices along
the way. I passed all the math requirements at age eleven and twelve. Girls
didn’t take math. When I walked into the AP courses in math, the boys in
there pounded their feet and said, “Girls, get out,” and I just didn’t need that.
I didn’t understand it and I didn’t particularly care, I was going to be an
artist. [laughter] By the time I got to college age, I was aware that math was a
weakness because I hadn’t had it. Everybody else had had lots of stuff, and
I’m not sure what I learned in that early age could possibly be any good. I
was nervous about it. The two schools that I liked the best were Wellesley
and Smith, and Wellesley had a math requirement. That’s why I went to
Smith.
Tracy: That’s great. You studied studio art while you were at Smith.
Martin: [00:04:33] Yes. That required Art History, too.
Tracy: That’s good to know. You mentioned that your mother was an art teacher.
Was she also sort of producing pieces artistically, or just teaching?
Martin: [00:04:47] No. She only taught for a year or two before she quit.
Tracy: That’s a good point. When you started studying art, did you find that you
enjoyed it? Were there aspects you didn’t like? What was your reaction to it?
Martin: [00:05:03] I painted all my pictures in the week before the end of the quarter,
all the way through. [laughter] I didn’t take it too seriously, truth be told.
Tracy: Then you also minored in psychology, which seems maybe a bit more….
Martin: [00:05:18] Relevant to what I ended up doing?
Tracy: [laughter] Yes.

17

Martin: [00:05:20] Yes. I did. I liked it. I liked psychology. We didn’t have that in high
school and so it was new to me. I actually did some of that reading. It was a
good program. I had a little statistics and stuff. I learned that that wasn’t as
scary as I thought it was. It was good. I loved Smith. I mean I just had a
wonderful time.
Tracy: My impression of Smith is that it seems like a very supportive, nurturing
school for students.
Martin: [00:05:57] Yes, I suppose it is.
Tracy: It’s a women’s college.
Martin: [00:06:06] Yes.
Tracy: [laughter] Did you have a sense of whether your education was typical of
other women’s colleges, or was there anything unique in your experience at
Smith?
Martin: [00:06:17] Smith was part of the Seven Sisters program. At that time, women
couldn’t get into schools like Yale and Princeton and Amherst. At Harvard,
they were allowed to attend some courses that weren’t at Radcliffe. They
were at Harvard. But you had to sit in the back row, and you couldn’t raise
your hand, and you couldn’t speak to the faculty member. The women’s
colleges offered the best education. I think that was really clear. I thought
Smith and Wellesley were the most powerful of the two in the sense that they
were bigger and had more faculty, more resources.
[00:06:57] I didn’t take advantage of what was there [laughter]. Even if I only
did a quarter of what I could have done academically, I still got a good
education, just cramming at the last minute for exams. I had a lot of respect

18

for those schools. They’re very different now. That so many other schools
have gone coed, they’re not getting the people with the best academic
records like they used to.
Tracy: That’s a good point. Throughout college, did you have a sense of what you
were going to do after college?
Martin: [00:07:31] Zero. [laughter] I had absolutely no idea. In those days, most
women were getting engaged. My boyfriend certainly thought that would be a
wonderful idea. We drove down to Greenwich, Connecticut, with his ring on
my finger, and I had my hand out the window, because that finger was really
hurting. It was like my body was telling me, “Get that ring off.” We circled
the entrance to Greenwich and I said, “We can’t go. I mean, we can meet
your mother. We can have the lunch. But we can’t announce any kind of
engagement because I’m just not comfortable with this.”
[00:08:11] That was when I realized that I wanted to support myself, and I
had to have a career. I knew that I was never going to be a great artist, so all
the sacrifices involved in that didn’t seem worth it. I had to find a way to
support myself. I went to an employment agency after the trip to
Connecticut. We were living in Cambridge. I was living with a bunch of
girlfriends from college. I went to Snelling & Snelling Management
Employees and there were two lines. One was for secretaries and one was for
managers. I got in the managers line and waited until I got to the front of the
line. They said, “You’re the only woman in that line. Did you notice?”
[00:09:02] I said, “Oh, no, I didn’t. Anyway, here’s my… blah, blah.”

19

They said, “Uh-uh. That’s your line (he points). You have to stand in the
secretary’s line. We don’t let women in this line.” All of a sudden, all the
sheltering of a women’s college where the brightest students were women,
the student leaders were women, of course women could do anything ̶ now I
realized that I’m only going to be allowed to be a secretary. It was a disaster.
Plus there was low pay. That was the start of my getting sensible.
Tracy: What do you mean by getting sensible?
Martin: [00:09:39] Realizing if I wanted to support myself I was going to have to get
some skills that people were willing to let women use and that I just hadn’t
used my education in any useful way to prepare myself for a life where I was
on my own, and independent, and supporting myself, and using my head.
Tracy: In terms of Smith, it was very interesting, your expectations of what you
could accomplish at Smith. Yet, I wonder if…. You had a sense that you
could accomplish anything, and yet, you then ran into this moment where
you felt like you had to start cultivating your skills to support yourself.
Martin: [00:10:25] You mean that my expectations at Smith were unarticulated,
unrealistic, and not grounded in any clear plan? Is that a fair statement?
Tracy: [laughter] Yes.
Martin: [00:10:36] Yes. OK. You got it. [laughter]
Tracy: In starting to develop these skills, what did you identify as being important?
Where did you end up working?
Martin: [00:10:48] I knew I could write. I got a job at Sterling Institute, which was a
collection of consulting companies. I went to McBer & Company, which was
founded by psychologists at Harvard. They did training and technical

20

assistance to two kinds of clients. One was big corporations, and the other
one was federal government agencies, mostly those interested in anti-poverty
programs, like Peace Corps abroad, VISTA volunteers, which was mostly in
domestic U.S., and then Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), which had
community action agencies, real community organizing in some cases in
every poor community in the U.S. ̶ urban, Appalachia. I liked the antipoverty side of things.
[00:11:50] As government things go, they tend to be more open to women. I
got a job that was half secretary to the CEO, and half proposal writer by
which I think they expected me to write the boilerplate to describe the
history of the company. It turned out that on anti-poverty stuff I could read
the government’s request for proposals, guess what they wanted, talk to the
people by phone to pry out of them exactly what they were looking for, and
then I would write a proposal. Then the company, which is one of these
small startups, had the history of anybody that got a proposal funded could
manage that proposal.
[00:12:36] Here it was, six months in, I’d funded two or three proposals, and
I built in roles for myself that were low level but professional project
manager roles. We went out in the field with the partners. I always picked a
partner who was older, better at it than I was, and who was willing to teach. I
kind of apprenticed myself through that system and climbed up the ladder
fighting. You know, they’d have project managers meetings and they
wouldn’t invite me because they’d assume I was a secretary. I had to do my

21

secretarial stuff for a couple of years anyway before I was completely into the
professional rank. It was like I was constantly fighting for legitimacy.
[00:13:27] But I kept getting promoted because I had this knack for bringing
in money. That’s officially not even a senior manager job, it’s a director job,
higher. Eventually I got to be director of the government half of this
company. I’d noticed that my raises were still based on a base salary of a
secretary. I went to the new CEO and I said, “I think my salary isn’t quite
right.” I hadn’t done any research.
He looked it up and he said, “It looks a little low. I’ll give you….” Some
pittance of a raise.
I said, “I found out that my predecessor earned X.” That was a guess. I
didn’t know. It turned out my predecessor earned two times X….My salary
was a third of his. I said, “This is not fair.”
He said, “I will match the salary of any woman in Boston or Cambridge who
works for a consulting company.” I went and did the research. There were
only about five. Most of them were my friends, as it turned out. These
women were all earning even less than I did. I went back to him and I said,
“This isn’t fair.”
He said, “Tough. That’s what the market pays for women.”
[00:14:56] I said, “OK.” This is after five years of working. I killed myself to
help this company succeed. I was working day and night, flying all over the
country. One average month I figured I stayed home five days. I was so mad.
I said, “I quit.”
He said, “You can’t do that.”

22

I said, “Yes I can. If you’re going to pay me a third, then you’re going to get
one-third of the loyalty. And believe me, you’ve already collected that.” I
walked out. It was May. I thought, “What am I going to do?” He’d said that
the reason I was getting less was my sex, my age.
Tracy: You would have been…
Martin: [00:15:51] Twenty-five.
Tracy: I mean you were very young at that time.
Martin: [00:15:56] I was a baby, but I was doing the work and I was bringing in the
money. There was an administration change in the middle of it so that the
new president, Nixon, had defunded the Peace Corps, OEO, VISTA. I had
to get all new clients. I still matched the amount of money brought in that
my predecessor had. I put in equal performance under much more difficult
conditions. It’s no excuse for them not paying me considerably more except
for this strange market argument that they could get away with it. So I went
to Harvard. A doctorate takes five years. That’s a better degree than most of
these men had. Almost all of them. There was only one who had a real PhD.
Most of them had a master’s from Boston University or a degree lower than
a Ph.D. (MBA). I figured, I’ll go to Harvard. I’ll get a PhD. That’ll take five
years. At the end of five years sex discrimination will be over and I will be an
old lady, thirty years old. [laughter] I went to Harvard and they said, “It’s too
late to apply.”
I said, “What can I do?”
[00:17:25] They said, “First, take the GREs.” I took the GREs and I aced
them. I did not deserve to ace them, right? I mean, I’d been a party girl in

23

college, but I just did really well, even on the math. I went back to Harvard
and I said, “What can you do? Here are my scores.”
They said, “We at Harvard require these other special courses, tests like
Miller Analogies. You’ve never taken it.”
Tracy: I’ve never heard of it.
Martin: [00:18:01] Most people haven’t. They don’t use it anymore. It’s a very tricky
set of logic problems disguised as analogies. It requires knowledge of history
and bizarre things, like locomotives, they called them. I remember one item
about a locomotive, and another one about the difference between the
residue in the barrel of a wine barrel versus a beer barrel. I take the Miller
Analogies Test, I get perfect. Bring back the test and they said, “Hmmm.”
They’re always too impressed about tests. They said, “I’ll tell you what. We
have this program called Special Student. [00:18:46] And for one year you can
take any course you want in any doctoral program as long as the faculty will
let you. So you want to get a PhD in psychology, go over and talk to the
psych people.” They agreed to let me take everything except for one seminar
where all the students in a particular class bonded and met all the faculty. I
took Ph.D. courses for a semester and did well, and then applied that year for
the Ph. D. and when I was admitted, I got credit for the prior year. Then all
of a sudden I was a legitimate PhD student. This time I read the books
assigned and worked really hard and settled down and got serious.
Tracy: Did you have any challenges in terms of the year that you were a special
student getting into the classes? You said there’s the one that you weren’t
allowed into.

24

Martin: [00:19:39] Everybody else on the faculty let me talk my way in. They were
really good about it. They thought I was amusing. At the end of the first
seminar, at the end of discussing all the readings and arguing about issues
and meanings of things, the faculty member says, “Sorry, guys, but the time is
up.” Everybody packed their bags, pushed their chairs back.
I said, “Wait a minute.” Then I was used to being the boss, right? I said,
“Please sit back down. We haven’t made any decisions yet.” Everybody
looked at me. They teased me about that for years. I was no longer in an
atmosphere where action was the agenda.
Tracy: That’s funny.
Martin: [00:20:35] Yes, it was.
Tracy: How did you finance graduate school?
Martin: [00:20:39] The year as a special student I had to pay it myself. My grandfather
had died and he’d left me a little money. I knew that he would just love it
that I had spent it on education. I used that money. There was still some
leftover to tide me over a bit. Harvard gave me a full fellowship for five
years, which I only used the four because I’d already had one, with stipend
and tuition. Then I could earn money by being a teaching assistant and a
research assistant. I loved the teaching and I became what they called a tutor,
which is a glorified teaching assistant that gets to teach the honor students
and design your own seminar. I liked that.
[00:21:30] I was active in other ways, too. Then in the summers, or if I ran
short of money, I would write a proposal for someone in the consulting
business so that, under their name, they could get it funded.

25

Tracy:

At the time that you were studying, you were studying psychology?

Martin: [00:21:58] Experimental social psychology. . . . That’s learning how to design
experiments to test causal hypotheses. Social psychology means that you’re
studying the interaction of individuals with social systems, like groups and
organizations, and even bigger collectivities. Even then I was moving to
higher levels of analysis. The program was a leftover of the old Social
Relations program at Harvard, which meant that you had to take qualifying
PhD exams, not in one field, but three. . . . I took them in sociology with a
specialization in statistics. I was really working on my math weakness, which
was now becoming a strength, ironically. Then I did something like
personality psychology, abnormal psychology, individual-level stuff to get the
other one. I never did anthropology. That would have been far more useful
given the way my interests evolved into cultural stuff. But I didn’t.
Tracy: After that first year being a special student, that confirmed for you your
interest in psychology and pursuing all of that.
Martin: [00:23:25] Yes. . . .
Tracy: You entered as a PhD student working in experimental social psychology.
Were there many women within your cohort while you were there?
Martin: [00:23:51] Yes. I’d say roughly half the class was women then, and it is even a
little more than that in psychology now. I mean, psychology was one of the
first fields to integrate. We had some problems with some of the men on the
faculty. We also had some great friendships and a whole lot of support. I’d
say the men that were trouble were few and far between. Since so many of
the good students were women, we got our way.

26

Tracy: You didn’t have any issues in terms access to advisors?
Martin: [00:24:29] No, I got gems of advisors. I was really happy. I think knowing the
other women and knowing who they worked with, they, too, did quite well.
We didn’t have a lot of clinkers. It was a very good department then.
Tracy: It seems as though from the time that you were selecting Smith College to
when you were entering Harvard, a lot had changed, at least at Harvard, in
terms of allowing women and being more welcoming to women studying?
Martin: [00:25:03] I don’t know. The graduate program had had women graduates for
a long time. . . . On the faculty end of it, there was only one woman in the
department, Shelley Taylor, who later went on to become one of the best
psychologists in the world. Harvard denied her tenure and later apologized
for having done that. The faculty level still had a lot of discrimination. The
doctoral program did not, except for isolated instances. Then the
undergraduate eventually abolished Radcliffe and merged. That hadn’t
happened yet. . . .
[00:25:56] There was still some residual separation. The dorms were coed, so
maybe Harvard and Radcliffe had merged by then. Certainly the honor
students I had were fifty-fifty. I guess things had changed in those five years
quite a bit at Harvard.
Tracy: Tell me a little bit about what research areas or research problems you started
to become interested in during your studies at Harvard.
Martin: [00:26:29] I took from my five years of work experience in anti-poverty
programs a real concern with injustice and inequality and discrimination. I
picked an advisor, Tom Pettigrew, who was a world famous race researcher. I

27

said to him that I wanted to study the relationship of different patterns of
inequality and perceptions of injustice. I was just as interested in studying
race, labor management, and male/female inequalities. I wanted to develop a
general theory that would apply across groups.
[00:27:24] The idea I had for the dissertation, and that was the one that won
the prizes, was that if you increased the variance within the low-paid group
so that people could look at people like themselves and see a few that were
really earning quite a bit of money, that they would be a lot less discontented
and reluctant to see as unjust the difference between their group and the
higher paid group. I did that with labor management. I filmed a very realistic
video of blue collar workers at the telephone company and a higher-paid
group of technicians, but who were definitely still blue collar, and then their
management team, all the way up to the top and down to the level just above
the blue-collar workers … many levels of inequality between groups
[00:28:19] I increased and shrunk in the audio track of the video the
magnitude of the inequality within the low-paid group, held the amount of
inequality between the labor and management constant, and then got
perceptions of injustice, and asked how realistic is this pay schedule, how
should it be changed? In a perfect world in another country, if you were in
charge, how would you pay all these people? I was trying to get a sense of
people’s distributive justice philosophy even though most of them who were
in my study ̶ and this was real important to me ̶ they were blue-collar workers
who actually held jobs like this in another company. They weren’t Harvard
sophomores, the way all the rest of the psych studies were. I thought that the

28

people at the bottom of a distribution would have different feelings than
prosperous Harvard undergrads. I studied perceptions of labor-management
pay inequalities.
[00:29:20] After I started working, I began to spread out. I had a lot of
trouble finding good distributions of blacks and whites within any
organization that was willing to let me in the door studying pay inequality. It
was very hard to get in the door. If I had to do an experiment, I wanted it to
be realistic with real people in it. You can see the influence of the five years
of working for a consulting company on anti-poverty programs with people
in Appalachia in urban ghettos that were really poor. I somehow wanted to
bring that into psychology and into a business school.
Tracy: The research that you were working on, you would [laughter] eventually be
working in a business school.
Martin: [00:30:18] No. I thought I would be working in a psych department. . . .
Tracy: I wasn’t sure if that connection would have been as obvious at the time, or if
you had a sense that you would teach in a business school while you were
doing this work.
Martin: [00:30:32] No. . . . I thought I was qualified to work in a sociology
department. Some soc departments wanted me to come. My husband got a
job at Xerox Park, which at the time was a premier computer science
research center, and that was his field. He knew even then that Silicon Valley
was the place for a computer scientist to be. It was his dream job and he said,
“Joanne, you can get a job at Stanford.” I said, “Forget that.” Lo and behold,

29

I got a job at Stanford. The Psych Department didn’t have a job that year
and the Business School did.
[00:31:17] The Business School turned out to be really interested in me. I
think they didn’t really grasp the labor focus of things. I hadn’t done the
women and black focus, I just had that in my head. I think they didn’t quite
know what they were getting.
Tracy: I wonder if you had started work looking at minorities and looking at
women, if the business school would have been as interested in you.
Martin: [00:31:48] I think probably not. I mean they had to stretch to let me through
the door with labor as a tacit focus, although my discussions in my data were
always in terms of the magnitude of the inequality. That’s how you talked
about research. Talking about its practical implications was not something
that a psych department would have ever asked me about. I was surprised the
Business School was willing to take me, but pleased. At that point it was
clearly the most scholarly first-class business school in the country, maybe in
the world. They were hiring people from basic disciplines, like psychology
and economics, rather than people with PhDs from business schools,
although some fields like accounting, you have to go to a business school
because no one else has that field . . . .
Tracy: You had gone into Harvard with an idea that you would get your PhD and
maybe go back into consulting work. It seems at some point that changed.
Martin: [00:33:03] I fell in love with research. I liked the teaching, too. I didn’t expect
that, but I just loved it. I was good at it.

30

Tracy: Were other women in your program? Were other schools as interested in
other women in your program? Do you have any sense of how typical your
experience was?
Martin: [00:33:30] I was the only Ph.D. student in my program, I think, who’d had
five years working for a for-profit business, even though my clients were
government agencies. As Harvard Ph.D.’s we didn’t have trouble getting
jobs. Yes. We got placed all over the country. Most of the jobs were probably
a little more interdisciplinary, as you’d expect from the requirements we went
through and the reputation of Harvard as being an interdisciplinary kind of
place. As we spread out, we grew older. One of my best friends was Janet
Weiss and she became a dean of Michigan specializing in educational
administration.
[00:34:24] That’s in something she wasn’t trained in at Harvard, but it had a
more applied slant. I think she was the only one. The rest of them ̶ Jenny
Crocker, Susan Fiske ̶ became well-known psychologists in psych
departments. They did well.
Tracy: You mentioned your husband. Can we go back a little bit and talk about him?
[laughter] . . . Was this the same person that you had had the ring on?
Martin: [00:34:53] No. He was a wannabe rock star, who never made it, by the way.
He was a fine person to play around with in the hippie, counter-culture days.
I stayed single for the five years I was in consulting and had a wonderful
time. Then when I went to Harvard I began to feel, at age twenty-five, that I
was very old and that I ought to be looking for somebody I really wanted to
stay with. On the first day of the first year at the Friday TGIF party, I met

31

my husband. I didn’t glom onto him right away, but we dated by October
and he moved in by December.
[00:35:42] Then we lived together most of graduate school. I think we were
feeling things out or making sure, on my part anyway, that he really was
going to do half the housework and half the childcare and treat me as a real
equal financially. He has always done that. He’s been really supportive. His
career was every bit as demanding as mine. That’s amazingly rare, especially
in those days. It worked out. I was lucky.
Tracy: What’s his name?
Martin: [00:36:15] Beau Sheil. He’s Australian, and one fine guy. [laughter]
Tracy: Were you having children while you were still at Harvard?
Martin: [00:36:34] No. I didn’t. We didn’t get married until the end of Harvard. I was
a little nervous about going all the way out to California, which I considered
the land where people had bean dip for brains. I was born and raised on the
East Coast and I thought California was full of crazies. The idea of coming
all the way out and turning down a job at Yale ̶ I was like, I’ve got to be really
sure of this guy. I said, “I think we should decide whether we’re going to get
married, because I don’t think I’d take this job at Stanford unless you’re
pretty sure,” especially because I hadn’t really thought about being in a
business school.
[00:37:22] He went for walks around the block for about a week at night
making sure, after five years together, that we were really going to do this. He
said let’s do it, and we did it. We got married at the end of Harvard. I didn’t
want a baby until I was pretty sure my career was on a good track. I took to

32

the Business School in many ways. When I got promoted to non-tenured
associate, they had this funny thing. You get called down to the dean’s office.
They do a pretty thorough review at three years. You either get the lead
handshake, the silver handshake, or the gold handshake.
[00:38:11] I got the gold handshake, which meant you’re non-tenured
associate, but it’s looking good. I was pregnant shortly thereafter.
Tracy: What would have been the silver and the lead handshake?
Martin: [00:38:24] Silver would have been, “There’s some problems, but maybe you’ll
make it.” Lead was, “Get a new job fast. We’re not going to fire you or
anything, but it doesn’t look good.”
Tracy: At the time, when you decided to have a child, were there any considerations
in terms of the tenure clock for childbearing at that time?
Martin: [00:38:53] Yes. . . . Of the young women on the whole Stanford faculty, the
women I knew were Diane Middlebrook and that whole cohort ̶ Nan
Keohane, etc. They had gotten this deal where you got another year on your
tenure clock if you were pregnant. What a blessing that was. I took advantage
of it. That was the first introduction to those women and what they had
accomplished and how I wanted to be like them and leave a trail that would
make it easier for the women behind me because, at this point when I joined
the Business School, Myra Strober . . . was still at the school. She was coming
up for tenure. She didn’t get it at the Business School. I was so surprised and
horrified. She founded the field of feministic economics. The hall talk was
that that wasn’t an important thing. Twenty-four hours was what I
remember, but it turns out it took longer than that. Within that year, the Ed

33

School had offered tenure to Myra. Ed School at Stanford. It never happens
that one department challenges another and picks up a tenure hire. That was
great for Myra. It would have been greater if she got the tenure she was
shooting for, but the university, as a whole, rescued her.
[00:40:49] That left me with a hundred men, the only woman on the faculty.
That went on for years. It was very upsetting and lonely. In those days ̶I’m
sure you’ve heard this story ̶ the bathroom in the hallway near my office was
labeled “Faculty.” When I first got to Stanford, I peeked in the door and it
was a men’s room. There was even a man in it. [laughter] There was a
women’s room and he told me that it was around the corner. I went around
the corner, and I’ve forgotten now what the title over the women’s room
was, but it wasn’t “Women,” it was something like “Secretaries.”
[00:41:41] That was where I was supposed to pee, with a fainting couch and a
full-length mirror and a little living room to talk things over with the other
ladies. I just thought, “This place is so unprepared.” There are a dozen other
stories like that. The annual faculty retreat was held at the Family Farm. . . . It
was an all-male club kind of like the Bohemian Grove. For me to go to the
faculty retreat, they had to put a makeshift sign on the cook’s bathroom so
that I would have a place to go the bathroom. This sounds like it’s trivial, but
if it’s so ingrained that it’s even in the architecture in the bathrooms, you can
imagine what it was like in terms of fitting in socially, finding things to talk to
people about. I walk into a classroom the first day of class with the MBAs.
Never the PhDs who were great, but the MBAs. There would always be, in
the early years, some MBA’s who would just walk out, go straight to the

34

dean’s office and say, “I did not pay thousands of dollars in tuition to have
some broad be my teacher.” The deans did the right thing, which was to send
them right back to class. You can imagine how hostile that student would be
and how many other people in the class would just jump on me because, you
know, eating faculty for breakfast is fun. It was a very difficult situation.
Tracy: The administration was comfortable and recognized your scholarly
accomplishment and expertise and wanted you in the Business School. It
sounds like in some ways, at least with students, it supported you. Did the
administration have any sense of what it would be like for you being the only
woman? . . .
Martin: [00:44:10] No. I don’t think they really did, although having Francine Hall
and Myra Strober hired five years before, even though both had left the
school, they did a lot to break the ice on the most egregious sins. The
Business School faculty never sexually harassed me in any way. I didn’t have
people jumping on me. That made it a lot easier. Aside from the most
obvious sexual things, the amount of prejudice against the idea that a woman
could be a first-class intellectual was intense.
What broke my heart was when I got pregnant and started to show; the two
faculty who I most admired came by to talk to me. One said, “You will never
be productive enough now. You were barely productive enough before.
You’re never going to make tenure.” The other one said, “I’m so happy for
you. It’s so nice to see women with your intelligence and genes having
babies. Of course, you’ll never get tenure.” Those were my two favorites. I
had to say, am I going to cry, or am I angry? I was angry. That was very

35

healthy. When I was a kid there was this story about a little choo-choo engine
trying to get up a hill. Do you know this one, where it says, “I think I can. I
think I can”?
Tracy: Yes. . . .
Martin: [00:46:01] That’s what I did. My husband was there at every step saying, “I
know you can. I know you can. I know you can.” Those years, having a little
infant, they put me on every committee. Every single committee all over the
university and all over the Business School.
Tracy: I was going to ask you that.
Martin: [00:46:24] Oh, yes. I carried that. They wanted the women’s point of view.
Me, of course, being a representative of all women. . . . The dean’s advisory
group in the Business School had a meeting and they said, “It’d be nice if you
could come.” I was two weeks after giving birth. You can imagine. I go in
there and I go to the meeting because you don’t say no to a dean, especially a
really sweet one like that dean.
Tracy: Certainly there’s been a shift between having the ornamental woman or the
obligatory woman versus sincerely wanting a woman’s input. At this time, the
request to have you on a committee, what is your sense of those requests?
Martin: [00:47:21] That’s a good question. They might have wanted a token woman.
But like, Kennedy [President Don Kennedy] put me on some kind of
committee for women and minorities. We went out and interviewed the
senior faculty in each department and tried to move them along in doing
that. I had no business doing that as an assistant professor, but they gave me

36

relatively easy departments, and I was outspoken, and I did help. I think he
quite genuinely wanted me on that committee, Kennedy.
The dean at the Business School put me on the dean’s advisory group. I
thought I might be like a canary in a coal mine. If there was some kind of
problem on the women’s issue, I might know him better, and therefore, be
willing to let him know privately about it if I wasn’t willing to bring it up in
the committee. I wasn’t shy and I did speak up. Then, after that, they put me
on the MBA admissions review. I looked over the criteria, which was our job,
and I said look what you’re calling leadership. You know, football captain
gets seventeen points. If you’re the leader of the ladies’ volleyball team, you
get half a point. (Point estimates not exact.) Now, I understand the
difference in levels of responsibility between those two jobs, but that seems
like women don’t have an opportunity ever to become the captain of the
football team, so you need to rethink what leadership is so that the criteria
permit a strong woman leader to look just as good in terms of the number of
points as an applicant who is male. That was an uphill battle and took years.
They really listened and they made an effort to fix that. That was an example
of putting me on a committee, and it making a difference.
[00:49:40] No one after two or three run-ins with me on a committee would
think that I would sit quietly and be ornamental. If you put me in a
committee I’m going to speak up when I see a problem. I got put on every
damn committee they had. They have a policy in the Business School, the
junior faculty are not put on committees. They certainly aren’t putting on
university-wide taskforces on minority relations. I was ten, fifteen hours a

37

week on committees at a time when the people I was competing with, other
assistant professors ̶ males ̶ were putting in two or three hours on a
committee, if that. That’s been researched as a major problem for tokens and
singles, pioneers let’s call us, all over the country. Blacks especially.
Tracy: I think you’re sort of implying this, but the potential benefit professionally of
serving on committees and then working with administrators, did that
overcome the loss of time in terms of research and teaching? How did that
all balance out?
Martin: [00:51:11] It was a definite cost. It wasn’t an advantage at all. The decisions
that are made about tenure are made on a basis of research and adequate
teaching. Sometimes more than adequate teaching in the Business School.
You have to have the publications in the first-rate journals. There is
absolutely no way around that. An administrator coming up late in the game
and trying to argue for a faculty candidate, I mean they’re not even in the
room when these decisions are made. They sign off on them at the end. I’m
sure they can informally influence a decision somehow, but the die is cast
well before then. So that didn’t help. It was a cost.
[00:51:55] Plus, I offend people when I say these admissions things that you
have been doing since the school got a fine reputation are sexist. It’s no
wonder you only have ten women in the MBA program. You’ve built it into
the system.
Tracy: Let’s talk a little about your progress toward tenure and how that worked out
for you.
Martin: [00:52:25] I got tenure.

38

Tracy: Yes. [laughter]
Martin: [00:52:26] [laughter] I came up after eight years instead of seven. They sent
out my file to thirty-seven people, I was told. Most files go out to ten or
twelve people. At the Business School at the time, it was very hard to get
tenure. Even one or two no’s would result in a negative decision. There I was
with thirty-seven chances to get no. I would say that was a biased review. But
it came out well. It really did. When tenure comes out well, then you have a
boost in legitimacy and prestige because of the tenure level, but also because
all these people are saying you’re the best one, two or three in the world.
[00:53:23] No. In the country. Then when you come to full professor, it’s the
world. It’s not really the world. It’s the English-speaking European-centric
part of the world. It worked out, but it was nerve-wracking because no one
had ever gotten tenure before with my plumbing. [laughter]
Tracy: Can you talk a little bit about how you managed acclimating to a new
environment, keeping up your research and your publishing, keeping up with
all this committee work that was put on you? Your marriage and social life,
your child. How did you manage this those first eight years?
Martin: [00:54:14] Very little social life. That was because you just stripped down
everything except the essentials. For my husband and me, our essential goal
was to be with our baby. We both worked full time, and so our second goal
was to do really well in our careers. One of the two of us was home by 5:30,
either pick him up at daycare when we started using daycare, or just to be
with them. We just did that. The two of us were running out of the meeting

39

excusing ourselves, driving across town to the daycare center, because it had
to be a multi-racial day center.
[00:55:04] It was at the edge of Palo Alto toward the neighborhoods that are
really racially mixed ̶. Picking up the baby, getting him home: that was tough.
We were very exhausted, because once he went to sleep, then we’d do some
more work. It’s this old story. We had two parents with demanding careers. I
couldn’t have done it if my husband Beau weren’t really doing half. We
found a super daycare center eventually. Once we realized the Stanford
daycare centers were structured for the wives of faculty members who played
bridge and tennis during the day. Those Stanford day care centers would ask
for volunteer hours in the middle of a work day. I tried.
[00:55:55] I would come to a Stanford center. We dressed then, so I was in a
silk blouse with a skirt and heels and I was supposed to take care of five or
six infants. They’d throw up on me, they’d dribble milk on me. I’d have to
change my clothes. There was no time to get back to the house to shower
before I’m in the classroom again. I mean it was impossible. Those daycare
centers were worthless. That was a characteristic, like the Bing Center, of all
the daycare centers at Stanford. It took us ten or fifteen years, the women on
campus, and some of the men, to get those centers to be more responsive to
the needs of faculty and not just cater to people who were working part-time
or just staying at home while spouses worked.
[00:56:38] That was hard. Because we had two salaries, we could afford to
hire help. We had someone, Ana, who came every day at seven and left when
one of us got home. That was a long workday for her. We paid her really

40

well. She cleaned the house. In the early days she did shopping, food
shopping. She took care of my son, varying amounts of time depending on
how old he was. She was really a member of our family and stayed with us
for fifteen years.
Tracy: I do want to acknowledge that when you arrived at Stanford it was in a
transitional period from a well-known regional school to [laughter] Stanford
as we think about it today.
Martin: [00:57:43] The Business School was more established than that.
Tracy: Oh, it was. Yes.
Martin: [00:57:46] It was. It had been a regional school. I don’t really know the
history well enough to say whether it was a decade or more. At the time I
went on the job market in 1977, it was the best business school in the
country if you were a scholar. I mean no question. It was, from an MBA
point of view, one of the best two or three in the country. I mean we were
drawing people not just from the West at that point.
Tracy: Do you think a part of you had noted that the business school was bringing
people in from the basic disciplines, that its hiring model was maybe a little
bit different than most business schools. Do you think that contributed to
how it was doing or its success at that point?
Martin: [00:58:32] Yes. Jim Howell had written a report that acknowledged that the
content that was taught to MBAs, and the kinds of research the faculty were
doing in regional business schools in the 1950s and 1960s, was very applied.
It was atheoretical. It didn’t have a lot of respect in the larger scholarly world.
He believed, rightfully so, that there were economic problems and

41

psychological and sociological issues in the management of organizations and
that there’s no reason on earth those aren’t theoretically rich researchable
areas that should tap the fundamental theories in any discipline. That was
what caused the hiring to become more discipline-centered.
[00:59:26] Not exclusively, because in some fields you couldn’t do that. But
we had departments like Transportation. We don’t have that now. I mean,
it’s Economics, Finance, Organizational Behavior, which is multi-disciplinary,
and Marketing. Some are more applied than others, but they’re all grounded
well. The quality of the PhD programs across the country in business schools
has skyrocketed at the same time that some of the disciplines have gotten
weaker in the fundamental discipline, like psychology became psychology and
health, or psychology and business, or psychology and X. That was classic in
other fields as well. That the disciplines became more applied, and the
applied schools began turning out good well-trained PhDs. Hiring in the
disciplines now isn’t necessary. . . . Although we still do it. Sometimes.
Tracy: Yes. When you went up for tenure, at that point, had another woman been
brought on to the faculty? Or were you still the sole woman?
Martin: [01:00:36] When I got tenure, I don’t know. . . . Look when Anat Admati
was hired. Her coming was just like a breath of fresh air. I was so excited and
it made such a difference. Shortly after her, Maureen McNichols came. Anat
is a mathematician. Very pure mathematician in finance at the time. Maureen
was a superb accountant. You can see they’re very different than
psychologists, which are seen as the soft side of things. [laughter] It became
clear that we were three very different women. The men began to react in a

42

more differentiated way to the presence of the women on faculty and
realized that we weren’t all the same. It just made it better. [laughter]
Tracy: If nothing else, did it relieve some of your being assigned [laughter] all of
these committees? Did some of that work become shared? Or had that
maybe died down a little bit by the time they arrived?
Martin: [01:02:04] It stayed constant for me because it was now legitimate to put me
in all these committees . . . because I had tenure. I spoke up about keeping
them off committees and giving them the same time to do research as other
people. I think a lot of other people saw that problem, too. They may have
been put on some committees, but I don’t think it was as extreme, and it
wasn’t university-wide whereas mine was university-wide. I think that fifteen
years into tenure, maybe ten years into tenure, I began to do more gender
research, which I really fought. I mean, you’re a woman, you do research on
gender. Well, no I don’t. I really fought it for a while.
[01:02:57] Then, after years of going to interdisciplinary stuff at what’s now
the Clayman Institute, and meeting the one woman, Diane Middlebrook in
English, and Nan Keohane in Poli Sci, these women became friends. Even
though I didn’t have any colleagues in the GSB I had Deborah Rhode in the
Law School. She and Barbara Babcock were more senior. There were ten or
twenty women on campus with tenured jobs. We would get together and talk
about our research, not all of which was on gender. Some of those women
were gender researchers and they were so interesting, and their observations
on what we were studying were so interesting, that I kind of got seduced into
experimenting with doing some gender research.

43

[01:03:48] I got activated by my own experiences of injustice and began to do
things like take on roles voluntarily, like co-leading the Women’s Faculty
Caucus, doing a study of the pay inequality of the faculty on campus. It was
shocking. Women faculty clustered in the lower 20 percent of the faculty
salaries controlling for department and status. We couldn’t get good
measures of productivity, but it was inconceivable that almost all the women
were in the lower 20 percent of productivity. These women had to be
outstanding in each of their fields to get where they were. That was my door
into campus-wide stuff. That put me on every committee to do with women.
[01:04:49] I’ve always been active on race, so that meant assignment to every
committee on minority stuff. Then I got elected to stuff, like the faculty
senate, and eventually the Faculty Advisory Board, which I was really pleased
to be part of because with only seven people on that it’s really important to
have one or two women at least on that to watch for prejudice. Fran Conley
was the head of it then. It was dandy. [laughter]
Tracy: You talked about your shift into gender research. Let’s go back a little bit,
and will you talk about the research that you had been working on? We’ve
talked about the inequality and perception of injustice, but I feel like there’s
another aspect of your research. [laughter]
Martin: [01:05:43] Yes, the big one. [laughter]
Tracy: Before the gender research that we’ve missed. Let’s go back a little bit and
talk about that.
Martin: [01:05:47] OK. What happened with the justice and inequality research is I
did that actively. At least at the time I was coming up for tenure, it was a

44

good half of what I’d done. Already in the second or so year I was at
Stanford a wonderful student came into my office, Alan Wilkins, PhD
student. He said, “Bill Ouchi is leaving the Business School, and I do
research on organizational culture, and I want you to be my advisor.” He
said, “Everything I know about you, you’d be just perfect.”
I said, “No. You can’t possibly have me. I am an experimental social
psychologist, I am not into qualitative research, and I don’t know anything
about culture.”
He said, “I’ll teach you.”
[01:06:43] I said, “What do you mean, you’ll teach me?”
He said, “Just you wait. I’m going to put this corner of your desk, that’s
going to be my corner. And I’m just going to give you an article to read, a
short one. And if you’ve read it, turn it over and I will put another one on
your desk. And we’ll talk in a month.” This is brave of him because I’m really
busy. I don’t have a lot of time to read something outside my area. His first
article was on myths and symbols and organizations by some anthropologist.
And it was fascinating. I read it at lunch one day when I should have been
doing something else. He noticed. You know, he was just coming by. My
door was always open. He noticed it was turned over. [01:07:34] By the end
of the day, I had another article. This title was Rituals. The idea of applying
rituals to contemporary organizations, how did they do that? I read that one
before I went home. You can see where this story is going. By the time I’d
read twenty-five articles, I had read the twenty-five articles that were most
relevant to his dissertation. He left his dissertation prospectus, just five pages,

45

and I liked it. He was applying these ideas to a local high tech company. I
was off and running. He became my first organizational culture student, and
that was the area that really brought me the most attention. I just loved it.
[01:08:20] I was completely untrained for it. [laughter] All these years in
school. You know how it is when you love something. I then became 50/50
culture versus justice and inequality. Over time the justice and inequality stuff
died out because I could spend an entire year convincing a corporation to let
me come in and ask its employees their feelings about pay inequality between
labor and management, or blacks and whites, or women and men, and you
can imagine that even if I sweet-talked ten HR people and vice presidents
into it, the president would hear about it the eve before the study started
after a year of my investment and nix it.
[01:09:12] I couldn’t afford not being productive. I needed data pouring in.
You know, the MBAs had a little work experience, but they were going to be
the executives and CEOs of tomorrow. They aren’t people at the bottom of
the hierarchy. It just became more and more difficult to do that kind of
research. At the same time, people like Peters and Waterman and Bill Ouchi
had started this new topic, very applied, of organizational culture
conceptualizing it as unified: All the people in this company will think the
same way about our company and we will share values which just happen to
be the CEO’s values, and it’ll help us be more profitable.
[01:10:04] I knew enough about corporations by then, and from the justice
stuff especially, that inequality creates subgroups that disagree strongly about
very important issues. If you try to brainwash them, you’re going to get

46

resistance or you’re going to get such an abstract mother-apple-pie kind of
message that anybody could agree to it and do nothing different, which is
why the organizational culture stuff initially was so attractive. You know, this
assumption that a “good” culture is unified, implicitly promised a CEO your
personal values will come to be shared by everybody, and you in the form of
your company’s culture will have a guarantee of organizational immortality.
[01:10:48] Isn’t that a nice promise? And very attractive, and totally untrue.
[laughter] I set out to study organizations in a credible detailed face-to-face
way that would show that people’s lived experiences of these kinds of topdown cultural interventions was to misunderstand or ridicule or ignore them,
and that what you really had in terms of culture (as a concept to understand
people’s lives at work) were really clusters of overlapping and nested
subcultures. Plus a lot of ambiguity, so that when you say quality of product,
and I say quality of product, I might be thinking about something quite
different than you are, and not just in terms of good and bad, but in terms of
what is quality and how do you get there.
[01:11:41] Organizational culture turned out to be very interesting, and I used
rituals and special vocabularies and story-telling, when the rituals were
company-specific and the stories were about past employees, to build a
record of each company that captured the differences between groups as well
as the commonalities that people shared. It was a more sophisticated and
complete picture of culture. That’s it in a nutshell.

47

Tracy: I can certainly see how an anthropological background might have [laughter]
been helpful in this. It hadn’t hindered you in any way, that your degree was
not in anthropology.
Martin: [01:12:23] I think it took me a while. Not having been trained, I had to learn
things the hard way. Yes.
Tracy: One question about the place of story-telling. As an oral historian, that aspect
of research…
Martin: [01:12:38] I saw your eyes light up.
Tracy: Yes. . . . Do you have a memory of how story-telling was tied in with the
other aspects of organizational culture? Was there an aha moment about the
importance of story-telling?
Martin: [01:12:53] I had it from the beginning. I’d read broadly and deeply in
anthropology by then. Stories just popped out from the very beginning as a
way of explaining what was special about an organization. I used to love to
follow new employees around and listen to the stories the old employees
would use to indoctrinate them, and listen to the speeches of executives
where they would tell stories, and then listen to the employees making fun of
the stories and changing the morals associated with them, and how stories
over time became changed, warped to fit changing circumstances, or twenty
people tell the same story and the differences would be informative.
[01:13:39] Story-telling is like one of the windows into a culture. Rituals are
another place where you can really use anthropological tools, except you’re
studying contemporary people in contemporary organizations and you have
to be very careful. You don’t have the easy “oh, this is a strange tribe in

48

Brazil” distance that keeps you unattached. Over time, even in Brazil, you get
attached. There’s a danger in applying anthropology to contemporary,
familiar settings. Training students, we would go to companies. I took one of
my favorite students who was serious about this but needed a lot of training.
[01:14:30] We went and for six weeks we stayed in Britain and were side-byside as we studied The Body Shop headquarters, where they made the
lipsticks, where they made the fuzzy peach gel shampoo, and the truck
drivers. We’d go to the bars afterward and talk to the engineers and the
custodians. We really lived participant observation as much as we could. I
think that was a great way to train somebody, although it wasn’t the one-year
apprenticeship in Brazil. That would have been even better.
Tracy: Yes. [laughter] How was this work received initially? What were people’s
reactions to this in terms of business schools and those circles? Did you ever
have a sense how anthropologists might have reacted?
Martin: [01:15:25] Yes. There was a lot of resistance for different reasons. When I
talked to a group of executives, they really resisted the idea that it wasn’t one
culture. They placed a lot of weight on the unified idea. Then I would
present data from a company that they all recognized, even though I didn’t
name it, that showed how this very famous culture was interpreted differently
by people in marketing and engineering. I’d had stories and examples of what
this very famous value actually meant to the people on the floor. I showed
how different subcultures interpreted it very differently, sometimes just in an
independent way, and then sometimes in a very resistant, hostile way. This

49

company had a reputation for everybody being the same and happy. It was
clearly not. That was how I would try to convince executives.
[01:16:20]I gave lots of talks to anthropologists, and the issue was that I was
professionally not qualified and that I wasn’t studying a distant culture.
Fortunately, anthropology was changing at the same time to legitimate the
study of organizations. For example, there was a faculty member in the
Anthro Department who studied India as a state. That was his Brazilian tribe.
They were moving to studying organizations and studying contemporary
societies, and the writing on that was wonderful -- about ambiguities and
inescapable biases and perceptual differences. Then there was poststructuralism. It questioned whether anybody ever had a handle on truth. I
read that stuff like a hungry bear. I just thought that stuff was wonderful.
Anthropologists sometimes expected me not to know anything, and turned
out I did and that I was reading the same things they were and I was going to
the same colloquia they were. I don’t think I brought everybody around, but
most of the organizational anthropologists came to read our stuff and see
that it was serious and well done.
[01:17:51] It’s a method that requires as much rigor and precision as
qualitative research; it isn’t sloppy journalism. I think I had to show that I
understood that in my writing and in my speaking. I tried hard. I’m not sure I
reached everybody. I’m sure I didn’t. There was resistance. There were a lot
of organizational culture researchers in my own field that were taking off on
this idea of unity and harmony, and I was going against them directly and
saying you just don’t have the evidence. You’re not even looking for the

50

evidence that would contradict what you’re saying. I know how to make that
argument. [laughter]
Tracy: This is a complete sort of tangent. It’s interesting in this sort of
anthropological work that you’re describing, like at The Body Shop, in some
ways you become the research tool, or you sort of become a conduit. That
there’s less separation from you. But, of course, that’s complicated then
because you somehow become a part of that research in a way. From an oral
historian [laughter] point of view, can you talk about that transition in the
type of research that you were doing and how you become positioned
differently, or….
Martin: [01:19:31] Over time within a study? Are you talking about the transition . . .
from quantitative lab research to field studies that are qualitative? . . .
Tracy: That transition. Yes. The second.
Martin: [01:19:44] In the beginning I’d study a company and I’d do something really
sophisticated quantitatively, and then I’d do something as good as I could
qualitatively and I’d publish them both in slightly different places because
different journals prefer different methods. Then I started to develop hybrid
methods. Nobody liked the hybrid methods. They were a little quantitative,
but they incorporated the qualitative. I thought that was pretty neat, but most
people preferred the pure stuff.
[01:20:10] After a while, I began to see I could get so much more
information from the qualitative study. I mean it was just a better method for
this topic. It’s no accident that anthropologists do culture research
qualitatively usually. Slowly I learned that, which is obvious to them, and

51

backed away from using the quantitative stuff. I must say that most people in
organizational behavior are still quantitative. I get more reprint requests from
my early attempts to quantify parts of culture using content analysis of stories
to count things, scales to measure value endorsement. They just love those
questionnaires, and I keep on saying I can’t find them anymore. [laughter] . . .
Tracy: You talked about the student that came to you, Alan Wilkins. . . . Alan came
to you and said, “You’re the advisor that I want to work with. You’re the
right person.” That seems like that would be very different from your
reception by students when you first arrived to having people walk out of
your class and that sort of thing.
Martin: [01:21:40] The difference is MBA versus doctoral. . . . The doctoral students
were always welcoming. They were always a great source of support and joy.
I just loved teaching them. They knew that. I gave so much, they gave so
much. My rapport with doctoral students was intense and it spread from my
field to becoming the doctoral director for all the doctoral programs in the
Business School. Eventually I won an award, one of my favorites, it’s from
the Academy of Management. It’s a national award for education. I got it for
my work with doctoral students, and particularly for my work all across the
country really, because I would advise students from all across the country by
email and phone, or meeting them at conferences, or sponsoring their
research, or reading and critiquing and citing their papers. I especially worked
with women and minorities who were finding it hard at another university to
get what they needed. The doctoral students have always been a big thing for
me. They were a source of joy at Stanford, in all kinds of departments, and

52

then it spread nationally and I started working with doctoral students from all
over the country as a supplemental person helping them make the transition
from dissertation writer to publisher, to young faculty.
Tracy: That’s interesting. I’d read an interview that you did with Paul Reist for the
GSB. This would have been in 2007. . . . I’m glad that you brought up
mentoring, because you talked about some of the challenges and being an
effective mentor for doctoral students. . . . The challenges you’ve obviously
managed throughout your career. But do you have a philosophy on how you
mentored students, or how you approached students?
Martin: [01:24:04] That’s a really good question, and I don’t have an answer. I don’t
know that I have a philosophy. I just cared, I would listen, and I would try to
help, and to get them to see things in a broader or more time-expanded way.
The thing about doctoral students is you have, or can take, the time to treat
each one individually, where they are at that moment in their development.
Any student that worked with me in an extended way, I would start by
having them join a research project in some kind of data collection, data
analysis thing. Then I’d have three or four projects at once in the same area.
We would meet in a room like this with eight or ten chairs. Each team would
report on what they were doing right now. Since it was all in the same topic
area, they’d read each other’s stuff, they’d help each other, the older ones
would teach the younger ones, and it created a sense of real excitement that
then some of them would go on and do research in the same area without
me ever suggesting that.

53

[01:25:30] I would never suggest what they do their research on. It was their
job to come up with a topic. I wouldn’t want to work with them unless I’d
had a chance to train them beyond the coursework, and I’d co-authored a
couple papers ideally, one where they’re second or third or fourth author,
and one where they’re maybe the second author, or even the first author.
Then when they come to their dissertation, I would never put my name on it.
It’s always got to be theirs, so that they would graduate with two or three
publications in addition to their dissertation, and there’d be no question
they’d be a clone of mine. By the time they’re writing their dissertation, it
might not even look like it’s organizational culture or justice and inequality. I
mean it would really be theirs.
Tracy: Do you have a sense of if that approach to students was typical of your
colleagues in the Business School, or at least colleagues working in the same
area?
Martin: [01:26:38] I had more research projects going along simultaneously. I used
this research lab model, which I’d learned from psychology. I know that the
younger assistant professors who are now coming into tenure, or even
beyond that into deanship, ran what they call labs. It’s the same model in
experimental social psychology, and they do it, too, in their field. In the
sociology end of organizational behavior, they, too, had research meetings
that had some of this flavor. I think that was why our doctoral program was
so good. Those students were really well trained.
Tracy: Let’s talk a little bit about your time as the director for the GSB doctoral
programs, in part because I know that you did a lot of work to support

54

minority students and increase their population. Can you talk a little about
that work?
Martin: [01:27:43] When I came in we’d only ever had one minority PhD student
graduate. I thought that was horrible. The other problem we had was that the
dropout rate on women was sky high, and higher than that of men. Much
higher. I worked very hard, and perhaps with too heavy a hand, to comb the
country for good minority applicants, call them up and convince them to
apply to us. Some of them weren’t even considering a PhD program because
they had big student loans, and some were not considering an academic
career because they wanted to make money. I didn’t get them all to apply but
I got a fair number of them.
[01:28:35] We got the cream of the crop. I was head of the doctoral program
for maybe five years. Maybe seven. I don’t know. This was really in the
beginning. The issue for me was to graduate them. I was like an informal
advisor. When they experienced things like racism, I encouraged them to
come to me and we would work out a strategy for them to deal with it. I
wouldn’t take charge and go talk to the faculty member who was the
problem, and sometimes I would tell a student, “I don’t think this is racism.
Frankly, I think everybody in the department’s getting treated that way and
it’s just that they should maybe, according to you, spend more time with you,
and you need to think of a way to make that happen, and here’s some
strategies.”
[01:29:25] Those students, and I’m ashamed of this, there were eight or nine
really wonderful students, and only one graduated after I left as doctoral

55

director. It’s a very long and sad story, but it was hard getting the faculty to
really support them when, in fact, many needed more advanced math
training, so in many cases they weren’t as strong as the other students. Even
though they were the best in the country, they just hadn’t had the really highlevel courses that the other ones had had. I got funding from Stanford to
give them a prep year before they started solid math. We did all kinds of
things that we could think of or they could suggest to make it work. I left
before they graduated because the doctoral director usually turns over fairly
fast, two to four years. I’d already been longer than that.
[01:30:26] The next director didn’t have the same priorities. Those minorities
didn’t finish and they were the best in the country. I feel like my support for
them did more harm than good because they had the experience of failing
out of a doctoral program.
Tracy: Which is challenging, to say the least.
Martin: [01:30:48] For them, you mean.
Tracy: Yes.
Martin: [01:30:49] Misery and shaking self-confidence. I’ve kept up with some of
them and they’ve made really good careers in various ways, and some have
even become academics. I don’t know how to solve that problem. Slowly it’s
changed and it’s helped by the fact that we now have more minorities on our
own faculty, so it isn’t just me. I did a better job at working on the women
problem. We got our retention rate way up and changed some policies,
including more financial support for both men and women with children
who needed particular kinds of support when a child became ill. I also

56

worked for international students, for example, when a religious riot went
through India and this guy’s parents panicked and wanted to come to the
U.S. and were going to pull him out of school unless they could. We found a
way to fund their coming here and staying with him for a while. Eventually
they went back and he stayed in the program and graduated and has gone on
to do really well.
Tracy: After you immediately left as director, you saw a lot of the students not
complete the program.
Martin: [01:32:26] Primarily the minorities.
Tracy: The minority students.
Martin: [01:32:28] The minority students, for various reasons, didn’t complete the
program. . . . All but one.
Tracy: The next director didn’t have that as a priority. Before your retirement, was
there ever any improvement in supporting minority students and improving
the graduation rates?
Martin: [01:32:52] Slight. Some. We had a couple of deans, including the one that was
dean while I was director of the doctoral program, who shared my
commitment on this issue. When you had the right kind of dean who would
make money available when you made a good argument for something, and
it helps the Business School has money, then there’s really no excuse for a
white doctoral contingent graduating year after year after year. I think that
became an issue that people shared, and slowly things began to change.
Having blacks on the faculty, and then having new faculty who were
supportive of racial issues has changed that a lot.

57

[01:33:41] Having the women numbers on the faculty, we’re still behind
other business schools, but the numbers are decent now. Not even decent,
but they’re better. Every addition of a female, especially a female with tenure,
makes a long-term difference in the atmosphere of the school, the policies it
adopts. We’ve had a spate of very good women deans, and each one has left
her mark in one way or another.
Tracy: You had brought up your experience with CROW and meeting the other
women on campus.
Martin: [01:34:24] Which is now the Clayman Institute for Research on Women and
Gender.
Tracy: I’m wondering if this might be a good time to talk about the Faculty
Women’s Caucus a little bit more.
Martin: [01:34:36] That didn’t have anything to do with CROW and the Clayman
Institute. . . . It was a problem that we talked about from time to time. We
had a female faculty caucus then. It was led by Deborah Rhode, among
others. I asked Deborah if she would let me do a presentation at the meeting
introducing the idea of a questionnaire that wouldn’t ask women directly
what do you earn, but would just ask them to look at the figures that were
published in the newspaper, which divided faculty salaries into 20 percent
groups, and say in which of the groups in your school, in your department,
where do you fall.
[01:35:34] That kind of a design got a wonderful response rate because
everybody had the sense that this was an important issue. Many women
faculty suspected, but didn’t know, if they were underpaid. You weren’t

58

supposed to talk about faculty salaries to other faculty, although some did,
but often not. Collecting the data, getting people involved to talk others into
filling out the questionnaire, analyzing it, and then feeding it back to the
Women’s Faculty Caucus -- that was dandy. They got all agitated and we got
people who know how to negotiate, teach them how to negotiate, and we got
people to threaten a lawsuit. [01:36:10] Equal opportunity was very inactive
in Washington then, although the Department of Labor got very interested in
this. We were actually led to believe that the Department of Labor was going
to do something on behalf of the female faculty at Stanford being underpaid
so grossly. Then there was a change of administration in Washington.
George Bush went in, the second George Bush, with Condi Rice who’d been
provost here. Within no time at all, maybe a month, the Department of
Labor discontinued all interest in the salary issue at Stanford. All our work
went kaput. What they did agree to do was to have a dean from the Law
School meet with individual faculty members, not admit any group level
discrimination so they wouldn’t be liable, but work with individual faculty
and the individual deans of the schools to see if that woman deserved more
pay. [01:37:34] Now, you can imagine the outcome of that was a lot less than
we might like, but it made a difference for quite a few. And a very big
difference for deans that were well disposed to looking at aggregate data
because they began to say, well, you demeaned her productivity, and you
didn’t like her because of her attitude, or such-and-such. If you go through
every woman in the school and you have a negative that you’re believing
about every one of them, did none of the men have these negatives? It turns

59

out they did, so why were their salaries 40 percent higher, or 60 percent
higher?
[01:38:15] Some deans ̶ not many, one or two ̶ began to see the group-level
discrimination, and they really made a difference for everybody, or for a large
proportion of the women. Other deans fought it tooth and nail. Biology has
always been very good on women’s issues, but the other hard sciences ̶ many
of them were areas of trouble.
Tracy: Yes. It sounds like it took a lot of…
Martin: [01:38:47] Time. I made a commitment when I was about fifteen years into a
thirty-year job that I would spend fifteen hours a week on women’s issues.
And I did. It was over and above Business School citizenship stuff or
university citizenship stuff. I did my fair share, and then some. In addition,
whether it was individual mentoring or some kind of university women or
minority task force, or something for the Women’s Caucus, or then the
hours on the Faculty Advisory Board, where my focus was often on those
gray tenure cases of women and minority faculty who maybe got a tough
deal, and delicate negotiations about that, it made my job a bigger time
commitment.
Tracy: We’ve talked a little bit about your trajectory. I’m wondering where this
conscious commitment to devoting time to supporting women and
minorities came from. Was there was a specific instance that prompted that
conscious commitment?
Martin: [01:40:07] I think it grew like a cancer. [laughter] I think I became more and
more aware of the breadth of the problems and the seriousness of them, the

60

fact that individual women were being demeaned. It was a group-level
phenomenon. People were interpreting it as their own fault, as an individual
problem. I had to do collective action kinds of things through the faculty
senate or the female faculty caucus or whatever we could invent, the faculty’s
pay study, so that we could get people to move. Also, the numbers of people
coming forward with problems. . . .
Tracy: These names have come up throughout the interview. Were there other
women on campus who had the same commitment that you did?
Martin: [01:41:02] Yes.
Tracy: Certainly through things like the Faculty Women’s Caucus you were working
together.
Martin: [01:41:07] Yes. I worked with Cecilia Ridgeway. We co-led that caucus,
sometimes with Deborah Rhode. Cecilia was in the Soc Department and
Deborah was in the Law School. We were a good team. [laughter] People had
different skills. Cecilia was a strategic thinker who, on occasion, could be
beautifully subtle and tactful. I was a truth-teller and I used numbers to prove
my case. Deborah knew the law and policy and the federal government stuff.
Deborah’s also great at rhetoric. She can speak to a large group beautifully.
[01:41:55] Other people were involved at different stages, but we were like
the second generation with the first generation being the Nan Keohane,
Diane Middlebrook, Myra Strober generation.
Tracy: That’s interesting. What impact do you feel this explicit focus and work with
other women had on your career at Stanford?

61

Martin: [01:42:21] If you were labeled as a feminist activist then, you could never
hold a major administrative job ̶ period. That was one of the reasons why for
decades there weren’t any women deans. That and the shortage of women
faculty at Stanford. I became someone who was never going to be a dean.
When I started out I would have thought that I would maybe like to go that
route, but it quickly became obvious that if you wanted to make things better
for women and minorities, you were rocking the boat and dangerous. Maybe
I’m not skilled and tactful enough to be the right person to do that from
within. I worked from within, but I never went to the newspapers. I had a
clear sense of what was too confrontational and I would have been
ostracized or pushed out of Stanford, I think, if I’d done that.
Tracy: Let’s pick back up with your shift integrating gender into your research.
Where did that shift fall in your explicit work at Stanford, in terms of
focusing on women and minorities?
Martin: [01:44:13] Every area of research that I did, other than pure method papers,
every once in a while would have a focus on gender. The justice and
inequality research had studies that sometimes would focus on
women/men’s pay inequality and perceptions of injustice. It was there from
the very beginning. The culture stuff, it began to be able to surface in some
of the papers just naturally as part of what was going on.
[01:44:45] Then there was this rat-a-tat-tat from the world outside of people,
“she’s a woman, therefore, she does research on women.” Oh, no I don’t. I
didn’t like being stereotyped that way. I would get invited on an editorial
board, and then everything I’d get to review would be on gender research. It

62

was like a tenth of what I’d ever done, and it was certainly not my major
focus. I’d resigned from the editorial board. I’d explain why.
[01:45:16] Lo and behold, pretty soon there would be another non-gender
researcher on the editorial board facing the same dilemma I had. Then we’d
talk, try to negotiate a change. There was my resistance to it.
Then there was the problem of the hostility I perceived, locally and
nationally, to gender research as being necessarily second rate. I questioned
that. But until I got tenure, I figured I don’t need to take this on. My feminist
research friends have accused me of that. They’re right. I just didn’t take it on
until I got tenure. Then it was about a third of what I did. It was never more
than that. It was often a subtheme of something else that I was doing.
[01:46:07] I don’t think people think of me as primarily a gender researcher.
Some do, but I think that’s more a reflection of my actual plumbing than it is
my vita.
Tracy: There’s almost this damned if you do, damned if you don’t dilemma. That
people, because you’re a woman, were assuming you would be doing that
work anyway, and, as you talked about your experience with the editorial
board [laughter], they’d be sending you those sorts of articles.
Martin: [01:46:42] There was that. The other side of it, and the more important side
of it, was the Clayman Institute, which was then called CROW, and these
seminars where the women from all over campus would get together and
each of us would talk about our own research, or we’d invite somebody to
come and we’d listen to something that we were all interested in to some
extent. That’s how I became exposed to post-modernism, post-structuralism.

63

I love that stuff. That was my recreational reading in the evenings after I
finished work. I think that it exposed me to new ideas, and I became more
enthusiastic about doing something intellectually with it. I was positively
drawn to it as being really an exciting area of research, doing things that even
in the culture area we hadn’t gotten to yet. We needed to. That kind of postmodern thinking could enrich cultural thought, too. My own theories, the
parts of them that emphasized ambiguity and paradox and contradiction,
were a natural fit for the post-structural ideas. My intellectual life evolved in
that direction and I was introduced to it by the women on campus.
Tracy: Besides meeting women through lectures and talks at Clayman, were there
other gathering points for women organizationally?
Martin: [01:48:33] We had the female faculty caucus. As a result of first presenting
the pay data, a lot of women called me to help them think through what they
should do. I met a lot of women all over campus through that. Then I co-led
the faculty caucus, and that brought other issues to the fore other than pay.
Cecilia and I in particular took on Condi Rice (provost) on a number of
those issues. We played the role of loyal to Stanford, but still in opposition
on some issues. Then in the faculty senate, I was out there doing a lot of
different things, not all to do with women. I got known. Then that got me
elected.
[01:49:32] I started getting elected to things like the Faculty Advisory Board.
It just progressed. It wasn’t solely, but it was heavily driven by getting to
know women all over campus on the faculty. That was nice because I didn’t
know too many here in the Business School. We were so busy. [laughter]

64

There wasn’t a lot of just social stuff. We did get together over dinner two or
three times a year and it was mainly the Clayman Institute group. We’d get
together for dinner and drinks and talk and stuff. We had a lot of one-on-one
meetings. On an average week, I’d probably have lunch with other women
two times, three times.
[01:50:32] Sometimes a woman I didn’t know needed advice on something,
sometimes a woman who had been raped or harassed sexually, a faculty
woman, and sometimes just a friend or a friend of a friend.
Tracy: Since you mentioned sexual harassment, in the mid 1990s, the sexual
harassment policy went through some revisions. There were a lot of
questions around liability and confidentiality. Do you have a memory of that
policy being revised in the mid 1990s, or your sense of the problem? Because
obviously you were hearing about….
Martin: [01:51:25] When I was the only woman faculty in the GSB …. If you were
raped in the Business School ̶ student, faculty ̶ who would you come to on
the faculty? So I did a lot of that kind of counseling then. The university
ombudsman put complaints about certain faculty “in the drawer.” There
were complaints about some people over the years that were never acted on.
The actual policy arguments were something I spoke up about in the faculty
senate, but I wasn’t a primary person on that.
Tracy: Considering your position and being one of the only women, what was your
sense of how prevalent sexual assault and sexual harassment were? Did you
see a change in that over the years?

65

Martin: [01:52:34] When I came I was really visible because I was the only one in the
Business School. People came to me from all over campus, freshmen even, in
tears, “I was a virgin. I got raped.” Over time, the university began to
respond on the undergraduate level by having a widespread network of
people who did that kind of counseling. I was very glad to get out of that
business. At the doctoral and postdoctoral and the faculty level, the
retaliation and repercussions of complaining are really career-sensitive,
particularly if you came to Stanford to work with one person in a very
narrow field, and that person’s going to be writing your recommendations
until the day he dies. Saying no to some of those people, they immediately
would withdraw support from you. An offer to talk on a panel at a
conference or contribute a chapter to a book suddenly disappears. It’s a hint
that you better find someone else to write your letter of recommendation.
Whether you’re going to actually take that complaint up through the
university hierarchy when that person’s been doing this for years and has
always gotten away with it, that’s a very tough decision for a victim, and I
found it awkward. I don’t want to talk about this much more because every
time someone comes to you, you’re supposed to report it to the
administration. Some of those cases, they would never have talked to me if
they thought I would report it. They really needed to talk to somebody. I
didn’t have pat answers because those people are damned if they do and
damned if they don’t. We could talk more about what if this, and what if that,
but like any good counselor, I wouldn’t tell someone what to do in a
situation like that. I’ve been actively involved in that. By the time the policy

66

came through I spoke up, and I spoke up in the senate, and I think it had an
effect on some issues. Over time, the most important aspects of that policy
did get revised, sometimes better, sometimes worse. I was just one of many
at that point.
Tracy: Let’s talk a little bit about your time on the University Advisory Board,
[laughter] and your experience. We talked a little bit about what the Advisory
Board does and your memories from your time serving on it.
Martin: [01:55:40] OK. There’s a lot of confidentiality wrapped around this. . . .
[01:55:47] What the Advisory Board does is it reviews any tenure application
that’s gotten a positive review at all the layers underneath. This is the last
layer of approval before it goes to the provost and the president. Provost was
Condi, the president was Gerhard Casper for most of this time. You don’t
see the file of someone who was denied early in the process unfairly. You
never get to see that case. The cases that reach you are either clear yes, or
something that it’s fairly easy to say this should be vetoed in some way. Then
there are the hardest cases that are gray. You could read this as a yes, you
could read this as a no, using objective standards.
[01:56:50] That’s where the Advisory Board focuses its attention. At the time
I was on the board, almost every woman and every minority fell in the gray
area. There was what they called “noise in the file.” All it takes is one or two
or three negative letters to kill a case or to create enough grayness that the
case really has to be debated. It was very important to have women and
sympathetic men who were sensitive to issues to argue around the gray cases.
It’s a huge job. Every one of us, we required something very much like a

67

dolly. You know, those things that carry big boxes? We had to have things to
carry the big boxes of files that we had to read. I think we met monthly, and
sometimes weekly during “The Season,” and there were just mounds of these
things. We did it very carefully.
Tracy: Fran Conley. She chaired . . . part of the time.
Martin: [01:58:22] She was the chair, and Brad Efron was the second in command.
Then, the first in command was Amos Tversky.
Tracy: [laughter] Being on the Advisory Board and getting tenure yourself, I’m
curious if being on the other side and reviewing people’s tenures made you
think about your own tenure experience differently.
Martin: [01:59:02] I did tenure reviews at the department level . . . 01:59:08] and at
the Business School level. The Business School does this faculty review for
every person who comes up for tenure. The interview is first in the
department, and then it’s all full professors in the GSB voting. I was deeply
involved in tenure reviews long…
Tracy: Before that.
Martin: [01:59:28] I can say safely that the only thing that stands out thinking back on
my own tenure review was the number of letters, and I’d mentioned that
earlier in this interview, that thirty-seven letters is a lot. It wasn’t cumulative.
From the very beginning they wanted that many letters. That’s a lot of letters
in a system where any no is important, and two no’s is like, ugh. I began to
see that I was treated unusually. When it came in, it was generally positive,
that meant maybe thirty-five out of thirty-seven letters were positive, so
that’s good. It’s a tough hurdle for the first few women or minorities. I’m not

68

the only one; when you’ve got the pioneers coming through they are looked
at hard.
Tracy: That’s a good point. I appreciate you are saying that you would have been
doing tenure review long before you were on the Advisory Board, certainly at
the school level.
Martin: [02:00:39] Most people are in a department and they just do it within their
department. Because of the way the school is structured, we also do it in nine
different, or seven different departments. That helped me get through the
Advisory Board experience because I’d already had a courtesy appointment
in sociology, I was a psychologist in terms of my training, so I was really
interdisciplinary to start with. That helps.
Tracy: In talking about your time at Stanford, I don’t know that we’ve
acknowledged what department you were in in the Business School.
Martin: [02:01:20] Organizational behavior. . . .
Tracy: Joanne, let’s talk a little bit about the awards that you’ve received. Certainly
what we talk about today will not encompass all of the awards [laughter] that
you’ve received, but there are some especially important ones to discuss. To
start, I know that you have received honorary doctorates. I was wondering if
you could tell me a little bit about the honorary doctorates and the
institutions.
Martin: [02:02:04] First of all, I was really pleased to get an honorary doctorate. I
mean, wow. That happened to other people. I didn’t ever expect it would
happen to me. The fact that they came from other countries was spectacular.
The first one I got was from Copenhagen Business School. I had worked

69

there occasionally teaching a doctoral course here and there and they had
come to Stanford as part of SCANCOR as faculty or as doctoral students, so
I’d gotten to know some of them and they invited me to Copenhagen to
teach. A couple of times I went, and then lo and behold they call and say,
“Come and have an honorary doctorate,” and I was like, woo-hoo. It is so
good. It’s in economics and business administration. That’s sort of my field,
and yet, not. But it was pretty cool and I was happy with that. Then a couple
years later, 2005, a university that I didn’t know anybody at, but had a group
of people who specialized in organizational culture research, arranged for me
to get an honorary doctorate from them. It’s the Vrije University. It’s the one
that’s not the religious universities, which is more normal in The
Netherlands. This is in Amsterdam. That was fun. They had ten people with
brass instruments going do-do-do-ta-doo. People were wearing costumes
that belonged in a Renaissance painting. They really celebrate things in a very
formal and traditional way.
[02:03:58] That was the Department of Anthropology. So, woo-hoo. I
thought that was fun. I thought, too, in a more serious level that just getting
an honorary doctorate for my work and having it come from Europe that
was a great honor. Both of them were for the culture research. . . .
Tracy: I think the fact that they were both European, and as you said, one was in
economics and business administration, and then one was in anthropology…
Martin: [02:04:41] Social sciences. Yes.
Tracy: It speaks about the reach of your research, but then also the breadth of your
research.

70

Martin: [02:04:52] Yes. It was just dandy. [laughter] I was really liking that one. The
other one that came along about the same time was the Centennial Medal
from Harvard. Now, that was neat because that one was for research that
benefited society. It was awarded every year to a few, like two, three, four,
five people who had received doctorates: could be a master’s degree, but
usually it was a doctorate from Harvard Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences. This award is coming from the discipline, and it’s coming from
having done research that made a difference to society. It was a Centennial
Medal, from my school that I went to. That was probably the best award I
ever got. I just felt terrific about that.
Tracy: In giving you the award, was there a description of how your research had
benefited society?
Martin: [02:06:09] They went all the way back to the early stuff on justice and
inequality. They picked up on the organizational culture stuff in the
statement. Then they picked up on the gender stuff and picked out some
titles that showed that I had a sense of humor. [laughter] I felt like that was
maybe strategy to make the presentations of the award a little bit more
interesting, but it was also a little, you know, not so serious. I was happy to
get that one. It meant that it was sponsored by my Harvard department. Here
I’d gone and not stayed in psychology and moved over to a business school.
That was a kind of very special legitimacy to get from my department.
Tracy: That makes me wonder, when you did go to a business school from your
department in Harvard, did you have a sense that that wasn’t necessarily
assumed that you would make that move. How did your mentors in the

71

department react to you coming to the Stanford Business School in a social
psychology background?
Martin: [02:07:31] Stanford was arguably, with Harvard and Michigan, a haven for
good psychologists. . . . [02:07:40] To come to Stanford was a good thing.
The difference between the Business School and the Psych Department, they
were aware of the difference, but I don’t think they thought about it very
much. I think they…
Tracy: Knew that you would do good work wherever you…
Martin: [02:07:57] Maybe. Hopefully. I don’t know.
Tracy: [laughter] Anything more about the Centennial Medal at Harvard?
Martin: [02:08:08] No. Except for it was a lot of fun. [laughter]
Tracy: You received that in 2002, is that right?
Martin: [02:08:17] Yes, that’s right. . . . [02:08:19] That was a busy year.
Tracy: What is the next award?
Martin: [02:08:30] There’s two from the Academy of Management. That’s nice
because the Academy of Management is the organization of people in my
field of organizational behavior, and a couple of other fields like business
strategy, nationwide, and even increasingly internationally. That was really
good. First one I got was the Educator Award that I talked about earlier.
That was for my work with doctoral students nationwide. Then the second
one was the Distinguished Scholar Career Achievement Award. That came
from the division of the Academy that’s closest to my fields of interest.
[02:09:17] It’s one of the really big divisions of the Academy and it’s got a
reputation for being serious scholarship and innovation. That’s good. When I

72

retired in 2007, the Academy of Management, the Organization of
Management Division, named an award after me. They created it and they
named it the Joanne Martin Trailblazer Award.
Tracy: That’s fantastic.
Martin: [02:09:58] Isn’t that fantastic? It was for scholarship that cut new ground and
involved lots of other people in a kind of a national movement. . . . [02:10:12]
People that were spearheading that were people I’d helped, or people from
Stanford, doctoral students from Stanford, who were on the prize
committees and stuff. They had to convince everybody who was not my
student and didn’t know me that this was a good idea.
Tracy: When we talked about your work in organizational culture, you noted in the
beginning that there was skepticism and resistance. I wonder if you could talk
a little bit about how that area of research is regarded today. . . . [02:11:24]
Martin: You asked me to highlight just a few of the awards or service things that I’ve
done. Because I’ve been in a business school, something that I’ve done that’s
been a great part of my education in the practical sides of running a business,
which I needed for work in a business school and coming from a discipline,
is that I’ve served on a lot of boards of directors. I’ve served on the board of
director of a company, CPP, and on the board of the International Who’s
Who of Business and Professional Women. That’s part of my gender
commitments. I also served on the Board of Advisors for the National
Association of Corporate Directors. [02:12:13] Also international advisory
boards for collections of universities in Australia and Canada and stuff like
that. I think this board service, which came before I served on the Faculty

73

Advisory Board, was like moving up a level in a hierarchy where you get a
different level of information and a different understanding of where these
universities and companies belong in a larger context. The board service has
been a great part of my education. I think if I hadn’t done it, I would have a
smaller and narrower focus in my work. I…. [02:12:56] That’s how I got
some of the breadth.
Tracy: Did you have a sense that the service on those boards would benefit you in
that way before you’d started doing that work?
Martin: [02:13:05] No idea at all. I just knew that I was interested in it, but I didn’t
know exactly what I’d learned. Some of the more board-oriented professors
that I knew at Stanford and elsewhere had encouraged me to do it because I
would learn stuff. Boy, I have. It was a good experience. I also served on the
Board of Governors of the Academy of Management. I did it for my
profession, I served on board for the Who’s Who for Women, and for these
international groupings of universities in countries where I had quite a bit of
experience going to conferences and working with people. It was just good.
Tracy: Any other awards or honors?
Martin: [02:14:09] There have been a lot, but going through those things can be
boring, and I wanted to just focus on the few that were important in the ways
that we’ve talked about. I’m content. . . . enough!

74

Joanne Martin
Fred H. Merrill Professor of Organizational Behavior, Emerita
Graduate School of Business,
Stanford University
Curriculum Vitae
EDUCATION:
B.A., Smith College, 1968
Ph.D., Social Psychology, Harvard University, 1977
Dissertation: “When Prosperity Fails: Distributional Determinants
of the Perception of Injustice.”
Sigma Xi Dissertation Award (1976)
Lena Lake Forrest Research Fellowship awarded by
Business and Professional Women's Foundation (1977)
Co-Winner, Dissertation Award from American Psychological
Association, Division 14, Industrial/Organizational (1978)
Finalist, Dissertation Award from American Psychological
Association, Division 9, Social Issues (1978)
Honorary Doctorate in Economics and Business Administration, Copenhagen
Business School (2001)
Honorary Doctorate in Social Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam (2005)
AWARDS AND HONORS:
Franklin Reynolds Fellowship from Harvard University (1972-77)
Promising Young Scholar Award, Western Academy of Management
(1982)
Winner, Gordon Allport Intergroup Relations Prize for research,
American Psychological Association (1988)
James and Doris McNamara Faculty Fellow, Graduate School of
Business, Stanford University (1990-1991)
Ruffin Fellow of Business Ethics, Darden Graduate School of
Business Administration, University of Virginia (1990)
Stanford University Fellow (1992-1994)
Fellow, American Psychological Association
Fellow, American Psychological Society
Fellow, Academy of Management (Board of Governors, 1992-1995)
Distinguished Educator Award from the Academy of Management
(2000)
Graduate School of Business Trust Faculty Fellow, Stanford
University (2001-2)
Centennial Medal, awarded annually to three or four graduates of the
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, for
Research-Based Contributions to Society (2002)
JMI Scholar Career Achievement Award, Western Academy of
Management (2003)
75

Distinguished Scholar Career Achievement Award, Organization and
Management Division, Academy of Management (2005)
Graduate School of Business Trust Faculty Fellow, Stanford
University (2005-6)
Creation of the “Joanne Martin Trailblazer Award” for scholars who
have paved the way for new ideas during the course of their
careers (2007), Organization and Management Division,
Academy of Management
OTHER EMPLOYMENT:
Spring, 2004 Visiting Professor, Department of Intercultural Communication and
Management, Copenhagen Business School (Expected next visit, May, 2011)
Spring, 1998 Visiting Scholar, Department of Intercultural Communication and
Management, Copenhagen Business School
1989-1990

Visiting Scholar, Australian Graduate School of Management, University of
New South Wales and at the Department of Psychology, University of Sydney,
Australia.

1976-1977

Guest Lecturer, Department of Psychology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

1972-1976

Research Assistant, Departmental Tutor, and Teaching Assistant in the
Department of Psychology and Social Relations, Harvard University.

CONSULTING (Full-time):
1969-1972

McBer & Company (formerly Behavioral Science Center of Sterling Institute).
As project manager, designed and directed research projects and training
programs for a variety of government agencies and industrial clients, including
Office of Economic Opportunity, Department of Labor, General Accounting
Office, VISTA, Peace Corps and various large corporations. In 1972, Director
of Government Marketing for the firm.

BOARD MEMBERSHIPS:
Board of Governors, Academy of Management (1992-1995) Details below
Board of Directors, C. P. P., Inc. (1993-2003). Member, Audit
Committee and Executive Committee; Chair, Nomination and
Compensation Committee
Advisory Board, International Who’s Who of Professional
And Business Women (1998-present)
Board of Advisors, Silicon Valley Chapter of the National
Association of Corporate Directors (2000 – 2004)
Board of Advisors, iMahal (an India-centric web site) (1999-2002)

76

International Advisory Board, International Centre for Research in
Organizational Discourse, Strategy, and Change, Universities
of Melbourne, Sydney, London, and McGill University (2000
– present)
ASSOCIATION AND INSTITUTIONAL MEMBERSHIPS:
American Psychological Society, (Fellow)
American Psychological Association, (Fellow)
Academy of Management, (Fellow):
Major Awards Committee (Chair)
2002
Academy Fellows Membership Committee
1999-2001
Board of Governors
1992-1995
Chair, Ethics; Member, Site Selection; Chair, Awards Committee.
OMT Division Officer:
Representative-at-Large
1983-1985
Program Chair
1985-1987
Chair
1987-1989
EDITORIAL BOARDS AND REVIEWING FOR PROFESSIONAL JOURNALS:
Scandinavian Journal of Management (Editorial Board, 2003 to 2009)
Organization (Editorial Board, 1994 to 2009)
Journal of Management Studies (Academic Advisory Board, 1996 to 2004)
Gender, Work, and Organization (Editorial Board, 1998 to present)
Journal of Management Inquiry (Editorial Board, 1991 to 2009)
International Journal of Management Reviews (Consulting Editor, 1998 to 2009)
Intervention Research: International Journal of Culture, Organization, and
Management (Editorial Board, 2005 to 2009)
Administrative Science Quarterly (Editorial Board, 1984-1988)
Organization Studies (Editorial Board, 2003 to 2006)
Academy of Management Journal (Editorial Board, 1984-1985)
Social Justice Research (Editorial Board, 1985 to 1990)
Journal of Social Issues (Editorial Board, 1981-1983)
Psychological Review
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
Journal of Applied Social Psychology
Organizational Science
Studies in Cultures, Organizations, and Societies
American Anthropologist
UNIVERSITY ACTIVITIES AT STANFORD:
1980-1981

Member, University President’s Task Force on Affirmative Action.

77

1978-1980 and
1986-1989

Ph.D. Liaison, Organizational Behavior group (recruitment,
admissions, qualifying examinations, and advising of Ph.D. students in this
field).

1990-1995
for direction

Director, Doctoral Programs, Graduate School of Business. (responsible
of the school’s seven doctoral programs)

1992-1993
Faculty

Member, Provost's Committee on Recruitment and Retention of Women

1995-1997

University Advisory Board
(Seven faculty, elected on a university-wide basis, who review universitywide tenure and promotions, department closings, faculty grievances, etc.)
Secretary of Board, 1995-1996
Vice Chair of Board, 1996-1997

1998-2000

University Committee on Committees, University Faculty Senate Liaison to
the Committee on Undergraduate Admission and Financial Aid, Graduate
School of Business Marketing Strategy Advisory Committee

2000-2002

Area Coordinator, Organizational Behavior Group, GSB

2002-2005

Provost’s Diversity Council (Committee on Faculty Matters)

1995-1997,
1998-2000,
2001-2003,
2003-2005
1977-2007

University Faculty Senate, elected representative of GSB

Board of Faculty Advisors or affiliated faculty member for interdisciplinary
research groups and departments, including Stanford University’s Center
for Research on Women and Gender, Organizations and Mental Health
Training Program, Stanford Center for Organizational Research, Feminist
Studies Program, Center for Social Innovation, Research Institute of
Comparative Race and Ethnicity.

1977-2007
Faculty advisor to Ph.D. students from Departments of Psychology,
Political Science, Sociology, and the School of Education, as well as Graduate School of
Business.
PUBLICATIONS:
BOOKS:
Judgment Calls in Research: An Unorthodox View of the Research Process. J. E.
McGrath, J. Martin and R. Kulka. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1982, second printing.
Organizational Culture. P. Frost, L. Moore, M. Louis, C. Lundberg and J. Martin
(Eds.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1985, sixth printing.
78

Reframing Organizational Cultures. P. Frost, L. Moore, M. Louis, C. Lundberg and
J. Martin (Eds.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1991, third printing.
Cultures in Organizations: Three Perspectives. J. Martin. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992, eighth printing. (Finalist, Terry Book Award, Academy of Management).
Organizational Culture: Mapping the Terrain, J. Martin. Invited Volume in the
Foundations for Organizational Sciences Series, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 2002, eighth
printing.
ARTICLES AND CHAPTERS:
Martin, J. “Relative Deprivation: A Theory of Distributive Injustice for an Era of
Shrinking Resources.” In L. L. Cummings and B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in
Organizational Behavior (Vol. III). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1981, 53-107.
Martin, J. “A Garbage Can Model of the Psychological Research Process.” American
Behavioral Scientist, 1981, 25, 131-151.
McGrath, J., Martin, J., and Kulka, R. “Some Quasi-Rules for Making Judgment Calls
in Research.” American Behavioral Scientist, 1981, 25, 211-224.
Martin, J. “Stories and Scripts in Organizational Settings.” In A. H. Hastorf, and A. M.
Isen (Eds.), Cognitive Social Psychology. New York: Elsevier-North Holland, Inc.,
1982, 255-305.
Martin, J. “The Fairness of Earning Differentials: An Experimental Study of the
Perceptions of Blue Collar Workers.” The Journal of Human Resources, 1982, 17, 110122.
Northcraft, G. and Martin, J. “Double Jeopardy: Resistance to Affirmative Action
from Potential Beneficiaries.” In B. A. Gutek (Ed.), Sex-Role Stereotyping and
Affirmative Action Policy. Los Angeles, CA: Institute for Industrial Relations,
University of California at Los Angeles, 1982, 81-130.
Martin, J. and Murray, A. “Distributive Injustice and Unfair Exchange.” In K. S. Cook
and D. M. Messick (Eds.), Theories of Equity: Psychological and Sociological
Perspectives. New York: Praeger, 1983, 169-205.
Martin, J. and Powers, M. “Organizational Stories: More Vivid and Persuasive than
Quantitative Data.” In B. Staw (Ed.), Psychological Foundations of Organizational
Behavior (2nd ed.). Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1983, 162-168.
Martin, J., Feldman, M., Hatch, M. J., and Sitkin, S. “The Uniqueness Paradox in
Organizational Stories.” Administrative Science Quarterly, 1983, 28, 438-453.

79

Reprinted in K. Asaho (Ed.), Corporate Culture. Tokyo, Japan: Holt, Saunders,
Japan, Ltd., 1985.
Reprinted in P. Gagliardi (Ed.), Culture d'Impresa: Nuove Prospecttive di Analisi
Organizzativa. Milano, Italy: ISEDI, 1986.
Martin, J. and Siehl, C. “Organizational Culture and Counter Culture: An Uneasy
Symbiosis.” Organizational Dynamics, Fall, 1983, 52-64.
Reprinted in H. Leavitt, L. Pondy and D. Boje (Eds.), Readings in Managerial
Psychology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Reprinted in P. Gagliardi (Ed.), Culture d'Impresa: Nuove Prospecttive di Analisi
Organizzativa. Milano, Italy: ISEDI, 1986.
Reprinted in B. D. Sypher (Ed.), Case Studies in Organizational Communication.
New York: Guilford Press, 1990, 71-86.
Martin, J. and Powers, M. “Truth or Corporate Propaganda: The Value of a Good War
Story.” In L. Pondy, P. Frost, G. Morgan and T. Dandridge (Eds.), Organizational
Symbolism. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1983, 93-107.
Martin, J. and Murray, A. “Catalysts for Collective Violence: The Importance of a
Psychological Approach.” In R. Folger (Ed.), The Sense of Injustice: Social
Psychological Perspectives. New York: Plenum, 1984, 95-139.
Martin, J., Brickman, P., and Murray, A. “Moral Outrage and Pragmatism:
Explanations for Collective Action.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1984,
20, 484-496.
Siehl, C. and Martin, J. “The Role of Symbolic Management: How Can Managers
Effectively Transmit Organizational Culture?” In J. G. Hunt, D. Hosking, C.
Schriesheim and R. Stewart (Eds.), Leaders and Managers: International Perspectives
on Managerial Behavior and Leadership (Vol. 7). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press,
1984, 227-239.
Reprinted in J. M. Shafritz and J. S. Ott (Eds.), Classics of Organization Theory.
Chicago: The Dorsey Press, 1987.
Meyerson, D. and Martin, J. “Questioning the Assumptions of Value Engineering:
Alternative Views of the Culture Change Process.” In R. Poupart (Ed.), Proceedings:
International Conference on Organization Symbolism and Corporate Culture: Cultural
Engineering -- The Evidence For And Against. Montreal: ICOS, 1986.
Martin, J. “The Tolerance of Injustice.” In J. M. Olson, C. P. Herman and M. P. Zanna
(Eds.), Relative Deprivation and Social Comparison: The Ontario Symposium, Vol. 4.
Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Assoc., 1986, 217-242.

80

Taylor, S. E., and Martin, J. “The Present-Minded Professor: Controlling One's
Career.” In M. P. Zanna and J. M. Darley (Eds.), The Compleat Academic: A Practical
Guide for the Beginning Social Scientist. New York: Random House, 1986, 23-60.
Martin, J. “When Expectations and Justice Do Not Coincide: Blue-Collar Visions of a
Just World.” In H-W Bierhoff, R. L. Cohen and J. Greenberg (Eds.), Justice in Social
Relations. New York: Plenum, 1986, 317-335.
Martin, J., Sitkin, S., and Boehm, M. “Founders and the Elusiveness of a Cultural
Legacy.” In P. Frost, L. Moore, M. Louis, C. Lundberg and J. Martin (Eds.),
Organizational Culture. New York: Sage, 1985, 99-124.
Reprinted in H. Leavitt, L. Pondy and D. Boje (Eds.), Readings in Managerial
Psychology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Martin, J., Scully, M., and Levitt, B. “Revolutionary Visions of Injustice: Damning the
Past, Excusing the Present, and Neglecting the Future.” Social Science, 1987, 72, 7480.
Martin, J., Price, R., Bies, R., and Powers, M. “Now That I Can Have It, I'm Not So
Sure I Want It: The Effects of Opportunity on Aspirations and Discontent.” In B.
Gutek and L. Larwood (Eds.), Women's Career Development. New York: Sage, 1987,
42-65.
Pettigrew, T. and Martin, J. “Shaping the Organizational Context for Black American
Inclusion.” Journal of Social Issues, 1987, 43, 41-78. (Winner, Gordon Allport
Intergroup Relations Prize from American Psychological Association.)
Reprinted in J. P. Van Oudenhoven and T. M. Willemsen (Eds.), Ethnic
Minorities: Social Psychological Perspectives. Amsterdam: Swets and Zeitlinger,
1989.
Pettigrew, T. and Martin, J. “The Fruits of Critical Discussion.” Journal of Social
Issues, 1987, 43, 145-156.
Meyerson, D. and Martin, J. “Culture Change: An Integration of Three Different
Views.” Journal of Management Studies, 1987, 24, 623-648.
Reprinted in B. A. Vedin (Ed.), Management of Change and Innovation. A
volume in the International Library of Management (K. Bradley, Ed.). Aldershot,
England: Dartmouth Publishing Co., 1994, 167-191.
Reprinted in Harris et al., (Eds.), Organizational Effectiveness and
Improvements in Education. London: Open University Press, 1996.
Reprinted in Burrell et al., Organizational Studies: Critical Perspectives,
Routledge, 2001.

81

Reprinted in C. Cooper and W. Starbuck (Eds.), Work: Contexts and
Consequences, Sage, London, 2005.
Reprinted in Organizational Culture (Two volumes, Yanow, D., Ybema, S., and
Sabelis, I. (Eds.), Elgar, London, in press.
Martin, J. and Meyerson, D. “Organizational Cultures and the Denial, Channeling, and
Acknowledgment of Ambiguity.” In L. R. Pondy, R. J. Boland and H. Thomas (Eds.),
Managing Ambiguity and Change. New York: Wiley, 1988, 93-125.
Siehl, C. and Martin, J. “Measuring Organizational Culture: Mixing Qualitative and
Quantitative Methods.” In M. O. Jones, M. D. Moore and R. C. Snyder (Eds.), Inside
Organizations: Understanding the Human Dimension. New York: Sage, 1988, 79-104.
Martin, J. “Deconstructing Organizational Taboos: The Suppression of Gender
Conflict in Organizations.” Organizational Science, 1990, 1, No. 4, 339-359.
Reprinted in D. M. Kolb and J. M. Bartunek (Eds.), Hidden Conflict in
Organizations: Uncovering Behind-the-Scenes Disputes. New York: Sage, 1992.
Reprinted in M. Calas and L. Smircich (Eds.), Postmodern Management Theory.
Aldershot, England: Ashgate/Dartmouth Publishing, 1997, 273-294.
Reprinted in B. Czarniawska (Ed.), Organizational Theory, Vol. II, Edward Elgar
Publishing, Ltd., Cheltenham, UK, 2005, pp. 139-162.
Reprinted in D. Knights and H. Wilmott, Organizational Analysis, Cengage
Learning EMEA, 2010.
Martin, J. “Institutional Theory: Explaining Organizational Similarity” (Book review).
Contemporary Psychology, 1990, 35, 231-232.
Martin, J. “Breaking up the Mono-Method Monopolies in Organizational Research.”
In J. Hassard and D. Pym (Eds.), Theory and Philosophy of Organizations. London,
England: Routledge, 1990, 30-43.
Reprinted in C. Lundberg and C. Young (Eds.), Foundations for Inquiry: Choices
and Tradeoffs in the Organizational Sciences. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Siehl, C. and Martin, J. “Organizational Culture: A Key to Financial Performance?” In
B. Schneider (Ed.), Organizational Climate and Culture (Frontiers of Industrial and
Organizational Psychology). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990, 241-281.
Martin, J., Scully, M., and Levitt, B. “Injustice and the Legitimation of Revolution:
Damning the Past, Excusing the Present, and Neglecting the Future.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 1990, 59, 281-290.

82

Martin, J., “From Integration to Differentiation to Fragmentation to Feminism,” In P.
Frost, L. Moore, C. Lundberg, M. Louis, and J. Martin (Eds.), Reframing
Organizational Culture, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 352-355.
Martin, J. “Escaping the Inherent Conservatism of Empirical Organizational
Research.” In R. Stablein and P. Frost (Eds.), Doing Exemplary Research. New York:
Sage, 1992, 233-239.
Martin, J. “Inequality, Distributive Injustice, and Organizational Illegitimacy.” In K.
Murnighan (Ed.), Social Psychology in Organizations: Advances in Theory and
Research. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993, pp. 296-321.
Martin, J. and Harder, J. “Bread and Roses: Justice and the Distribution of Financial
and Socio-emotional Rewards in Organizations.” Social Justice Research, 1994, 7, 241264.
Martin, J. “The Organization of Exclusion: The Institutionalization of Sex Inequality,
Gendered Faculty Jobs, and Gendered Knowledge in Organizational Theory and
Research.” Organization, 1994, 1, 401-431.
Martin, J. “Organizational Culture,” “Rituals,” and “Taboos.” Three entries in N.
Nicholson, R. Schuler and A. Van de Ven (Eds.), The Blackwell Encyclopedic
Dictionary of Organizational Behavior. Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell Ltd., 1995,
pp. 376-82; 494-5; 554.
Martin, J. “The Style and Structure of Cultures in Organizations: Three Perspectives.”
Organizational Science, 1995, 6, 230-232.
Reprinted in P. Frost, R. Daft, and A. Lewin, Talking about Organizational
Science: Debates and Dialogues from Crossroads. (P. Frost, A. Lewin, R. Daft,
Eds.), Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 2000.
Martin, J. and Frost, P. “The Organizational Culture War Games: A Struggle for
Intellectual Dominance.” In S. Clegg, C. Hardy, and W. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of
Organizational Studies. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1996, pp. 598-621. (The Handbook
won the Academy of Management 1997 Terry book award.)
Kramer, R. and Martin, J. “Transitions and Turning Points in Faculty-Doctoral Student
Relationships.” In P. Frost and S. Taylor (Eds.), Rhythms of Academic Life. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage, 1996, pp.165-180.
Martin, J. and Knopoff, K. “The Gendered Implications of Apparently GenderNeutral Organizational Theory: Re-Reading Weber.” In A. Larson and E. Freeman,
(Eds.), Ruffin Lecture Series (Volume III): Business Ethics and Women’s Studies.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1997, pp. 30-49.

83

Martin, J. and Meyerson, D. “Executive Women at Link.Com.” A set of eight teaching
cases, with instructor’s notes, Harvard University Press (#OB 33 in Stanford
University series), September, 1997.
Excerpts reprinted in R. Gordon, Organizational Behavior: A Diagnostic
Approach. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2002.
Reprinted in P. Frost, W. Nord, and L. Krefting (Eds.), Organizational Reality,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003, and in Managerial and Organizational
Reality (Revised 2nd edition), 2004, pp. 143-167.
Martin, J., Knopoff, K. and Beckman, C. “An Alternative to Bureaucratic
Impersonality and Emotional Labor: Bounded Emotionality at the Body Shop.”
Administrative Science Quarterly, 1998, 43, 429-469.
“Bounded Emotionality and The Body Shop,” a revised version reprinted in S.
Fineman, (Ed.), Emotions in Organizations, 2000, Vol. 2, pp. 115-139.
Martin, J. and Meyerson, D. “Women and Power: Conformity, Resistance, and
Disorganized Co-Action.” In R. Kramer and M. Neale (Eds.), Power and Influence in
Organizations, 1998, pp. 311-348.
Martin, J., “Hidden Gendered Assumptions in Mainstream Organizational Theory and
Research,” Journal of Management Inquiry, 9, 2000, pp. 207-216.
Martin, J., “Swimming Against the Tide: Aligning Values and Work, “Renewing
Research Practice, R. Stablein and P. Frost, (Eds.), Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2003, pp. 29-53.
Martin, J., “Meta-theoretical Controversies in Studying Organizational Culture,” in H.
Tsoukas and C. Knudsen (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Organization Theory,
London: Oxford University Press, 2003, pp. 392-419.
Martin, J., “Feminist Theory and Critical Theory: Unexplored Synergies.” in M.
Alvesson and H. Willmott (eds.), Studying Management Critically, London: Sage, 2003,
pp. 66-91.
Taylor, S.E. and Martin, J., “The Academic Marathon: Controlling One's Career,” in J.
M. Darley, M. P. Zanna, and H. L. Roediger (eds.), The Compleat Academic, Second
Edition, Washington, D.C., American Psychological Association Press, 2003, pp. 363392.
Martin, J. “Organizational Culture.” In N. Nicholson, P. Audia, and M. Pillutla (Eds.),
The Blackwell Encyclopedic Dictionary of Organizational Behavior, Second edition,
Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell Ltd., 2005, pp. 272-278.

84

Martin, J. “Organizational Culture: Pieces of the Puzzle.” In J. M. Shafritz, J. S. Ott, Y.
S. Jang, (Eds.), Classics of Organizational Theory, Sixth edition, Wadsworth
Publishing, 2005, pp. 393-414.
Martin, J., Frost, P., and O'Neill, O.A. “Organizational Culture: Beyond Struggles for
Intellectual Dominance,” In S. Clegg, C. Hardy, T. Lawrence, and W. Nord (Eds.), The
Sage Handbook of Organization Studies, Second Edition, Newbury Park, CA: Sage,
2006.
Martin, J. and Meyerson, D. “Gender Inequity and the Need to Study Change.” In D.
Barry and H. Hansen, (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of New Approaches in
Management and Organisation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 552-554, 2008.
Martin, J., “A Cultural View of the Organizational Community at Stanford University,”
in M. Lounsbury (Series Ed.), Research in the Sociology of Organizations, Vol. 28,
Stanford’s Organization Theory Renaissance, 1970-2000, (K. Schoonhoven and F.
Dobbin, Eds.). Emerald Publishing Group, 2010, pp. 241-262.
Martin, J., “Does Gender Inequality Ever Disappear?” in E. Jeanes, D. Knights, and P.
Yancy-Martin, (Eds.), Handbook of Gender, Work, and Organizations. Blackwells,
Oxford, 2010, pp. 213-230.
Martin, J., “When Experts Learn: Intellectual Humility as a Key to Research
Generativity,” in A. Carlsen and J.M. Dutton, (Eds.), Research Alive: Exploring
Generative Moments in Doing Qualitative Research, Copenhagen Business School
Press, Copenhagen, 2011, pp. 206-211.
PROFESSIONAL PRESENTATIONS:
“When Prosperity Fails: Pay Inequities and Locus of Control as Determinants of
Fraternal Deprivation.” Paper presented at the meeting of the Western Psychological
Association, San Francisco, April 1978.
“Pay Comparisons and the Perception of Injustice.” Paper presented at the meeting of
the American Psychological Association, Toronto, Canada, August 1978.
“The Effects of Rate of Change in Performance.” Paper presented at the meeting of
the American Psychological Association, Toronto, Canada, August 1978.
“Distributional Determinants of the Perception of Injustice.” Invited address, 1978
Rains Wallace Dissertation Awards, American Psychological Association, Toronto,
Canada, August 1978.
“Income Inequality and the Perception of Injustice: A Social Psychological Approach.”
Paper presented at the Institute for Poverty Research, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI, October 1978.

85

“The Effects of Level of Abstraction of Scripts on Accuracy of Recall” (with Kerry
Patterson and Raymond Price). Paper presented at the meeting of the Western
Psychological Association, San Diego, CA, April 1979.
“Relative Deprivation Among Secretaries: The Effect of the Token Female Executive”
(with Raymond Price, Robert Bies, and Melanie Powers). Paper presented at the
meeting of the American Psychological Association, New York, September 1979.
“If Case Examples Provide No Proof, Why Underutilize Statistical Information?”
(with Melanie Powers). Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychological
Association, New York, September 1979.
“Now That I Can Have It I Don't Want It: The Effects of Opportunity on
Aspirations” (with Raymond L. Price, Robert J. Bies and Melanie E. Powers). Paper
presented at the meeting of the Western Psychological Association, Honolulu, HI, May
1980.
“Skepticism and the True Believer: The Effects of Case and/or Baserate Information
on Belief and Commitment” (with Melanie E. Powers). Paper presented at the meeting
of the Western Psychological Association, Honolulu, May 1980.
“Truth and Corporate Propaganda: The Value of a Good War Story.” In J. Martin
(chair), Stories and Symbolism in Organizations. Symposium presented at the meeting
of the Academy of Management, Detroit, MI, August 1980.
“Memory for the Content and Structure of Scripts Presented at Varying Levels of
Abstraction” (with Kerry Patterson, Wendy Harrod and Caren Siehl). In F. Miller
(chair), The Concept of Schemas in Social Psychology. Symposium presented at the
meeting of the American Psychological Association, Montreal, Canada, September
1980.
“The Development of Scripts” (with Wendy Harrod, Melanie Powers and Caren Siehl).
In J. Martin (chair), The Development of Knowledge Structures. Symposium
presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, Montreal,
Canada, September 1980.
“A Garbage Can Model of the Research Process.” In J. E. McGrath (chair), Better
Ways of Making Judgment Calls in Research. Symposium presented at the Conference
on Methodological Innovations in Studying Organizations, sponsored by the Division
of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, American Psychological Association,
Greensboro, NC, August 1980, March 1981.
“Breaking Up the Mono-method Monopolies in Organizational Research.” Paper
presented at the Doctoral Consortium Session on Objective Versus Subjective
Constructions of Reality at the meeting of the Academy of Management, San Diego,
CA, July 1981.

86

“Better Ways of Making Judgment Calls in Methodological Decision Making.” In R.
Daft (chair), Methodological Innovations for Studying Organizations. Symposium
presented at the meeting of the Academy of Management, San Diego, CA, August
1981.
“Segregation, Deprivation, and Collective Action” (with Philip Brickman). In J. M.
Steil (chair), When Is Unequal Unjust? The Victim Speaks. Symposium presented at
the meeting of the American Psychological Association, Los Angeles, CA, August
1981.
“The Enculturation Process: Opening the Black Box in Socialization Research.”
Promising Young Scholar Award, invited address at the meeting of the Western
Academy of Management, Colorado Springs, CO, April 1982.
“The Role of Symbolic Management: How Can Managers Effectively Transmit
Organizational Culture?” (with Caren Siehl). Paper presented at the International
Symposium on Managerial Behavior and Leadership Research, sponsored by
N.A.T.O., Oxford, England, July 1982.
“Organizational Culture and Counter-culture: General Motors and DeLorean” (with
Caren Siehl). In J. Martin (Chair), Can Culture Be Managed? Symposium presented at
the meeting of the Academy of Management, New York, August 1982.
“The Uniqueness Paradox in Organizational Stories” (with Martha Feldman, Mary Jo
Hatch and Sim Sitkin). Paper presented at the Myth, Symbols, and Folklore
Conference: Expanding the Analysis of Organizations, University of California at Los
Angeles, CA, March 1983.
“Cultural and Structural Methods of Institutionalizing Alternatives to Individual
Leadership.” In J. Martin (chair), Leadership: The Future of An Illusion? Symposium
presented at the meeting of the Western Psychological Association, San Francisco,
April 1983.
“Affirmative Action and Co-worker Choice” (with Gregory Northcraft). Paper
presented at the meeting of the Western Psychological Association, San Francisco,
April 1983.
“Wild-Eyed Guys and Old Salts: The Birth of Organizational Sub-cultures” (with Sim
Sitkin, Tom Kosnik and Michael Boehm). In S. Barley and M. R. Louis (chairs), Many
In One: Organizations as Multi-cultural Entities. Symposium presented at the meeting
of the Academy of Management, Dallas, TX, August 1983.
“Psychological and Sociological Barriers to Collective Action” (with Philip Brickman
and Alan Murray). In R. Bies (chair), Justice: Beyond Equity Theory. Symposium
presented at the meeting of the Academy of Management, Dallas, TX, August 1983.
“Entrepreneurial Control of the Culture Creation Process” (with Mary Jo Hatch, Tom
Kosnik and Sim Sitkin). In J. Martin (chair), Organizational Culture and the
87

Institutionalization of Charisma. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the
Academy of Management, Dallas, TX, August 1983.
“Moral Outrage and Self-interest: When Injustice is Irrelevant.” Invited presentation at
the Fourth Ontario Symposium on Personality and Social Psychology (J. Olson, chair),
Relative Deprivation and Assertive Action, University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada, October 1983.
“The Ambiguities of the Culture Management Process” (with Sim Sitkin and Michael
Boehm). Paper presented at the Conference on Managing Ambiguity and Change,
University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, IL, October 1983.
“Overcoming Resistance to Minority Inclusion: Shaping the Organizational Context”
(with Thomas Pettigrew). Invited presentation at the Conference on Minorities in High
Technology Organizations, Pensacola, FL, February 1984.
“Measuring Organizational Culture” (with Caren Siehl). In J. Graham (chair),
Organizational Culture. Symposium presented at the meeting of the Western Academy
of Management, Vancouver, Canada, April 1984.
“Founders and the Elusiveness of a Cultural Legacy” (with Sim Sitkin and Michael
Boehm). Invited presentation at the conference on Organizational Culture and the
Meaning of Life in the Workplace, Vancouver, Canada, April 1984.
“Conflicting Socially Constructed Realities: The Culture Creation Process” (with Sim
Sitkin and Michael Boehm). In E. Haslett (chair), Communicative Processes in
Organizations: An Interpretive Perspective. Symposium presented at the meeting of
the International Communication Association, San Francisco, May 1984.
“The Tolerance of Injustice.” Invited presentation at the International Conference on
Justice and Inter-group Relations, Marburg, Germany, July 1984.
“Founders and the Elusive Myth of a Cultural Legacy” (with Sim Sitkin and Michael
Boehm). In C. Siehl and M. McGrath (chairs), Organizational Life Cycles,
Effectiveness, and Culture: Toward a Dynamic Perspective. Symposium presented at
the meeting of the Academy of Management, Boston, MA, August 1984.
“Avoiding Easy Answers to the Culture Management Dilemma.” In P. Banas (chair),
Corporate Culture: The Great Debate. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of
the American Psychological Association, Los Angeles, CA, August, 1985.
“Equal Opportunity Is Not Enough: Beyond Procedural to Distributive Justice.” In R.
Nacoste (chair), Affirmative Action: Empowerment or Delegitimation?. Symposium
presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, Los
Angeles, CA, August, 1985.

88

“Revolutionary Visions of Injustice” (with Maureen Scully). Invited presentation at the
International Conference on Social Dilemmas and Collective Action, Nags Head, NC,
June 1986.
“Questioning the Assumptions of Value Engineering: Alternative Views of the Culture
Change Process” (with Debra Meyerson). Paper presented at the Second International
Conference on Organizational Symbolism and Corporate Culture, Montreal, Canada,
June 1986 and at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Chicago, August
1986.
“Revolutionary Leaders: Damning the Past, Excusing the Present, Neglecting the
Future” (with Maureen Scully). In R. Bies and S. Sitkin (chairs), Justification in
Organizations: Leadership Through Excuse Making. Symposium presented at the
annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Chicago, August 1986.
“Homogeneity, Diversity, and Ambiguity in Organizational Cultures.” Invited address
presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, Division
8, Washington, D.C., August 1986.
“Economic Rationales for Hierarchical Control.” Invited presentation at a conference
on “Perspectives on the Nature of Corporations,” jointly sponsored by Hitotsubashi
University and the Stanford Graduate School of Business, Itoh City, Japan, March
1987.
“A Black Hole: Ambiguity in Organizational Cultures.” Invited presentation at the
Third International Conference on Organizational Symbolism and Corporate Culture,
Milan, Italy, June 1987.
New Directions for Organizational Justice Research, J. Greenberg (chair). Symposium
presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, New Orleans, LA,
August 1987.
“The Quantitative Transformation of Qualitative Data” (with Barbara Levitt and
Maureen Scully). In D. Tjosveld (chair), Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative
Methods. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of
Management, New Orleans, LA, August 1987.
“Distributive Justice in Organizations: The Effects of Prior Pay Inequality” (with
Joseph Harder). Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Western Psychological
Association, San Francisco, March 1988.
“Distributive Norms and the Communication of Organizational Values” (with Joseph
Harder and Robert Silvers). In R. Bies and J. Greenberg (chairs), Communicating
Fairness in Organizations. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the
Academy of Management, Chicago, August 1988.
“The Suppression of Gender Conflict in Organizations: Deconstructing the Fissure
Between Public and Private.” In D. Kolb (chair), The Cultural Contexts of
89

Organizational Conflict. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Academy
of Management, Chicago, August 1988.
“Publish and Perish.” In K. Boal (chair), Doctoral Consortium at the annual meeting
of the Western Academy of Management, San Francisco, March 1988.
“Harmony, Conflict, and Ambiguity in Organizations.” Invited presentation at meeting
of Australian and Pacific Researchers in Organization Studies, Sydney, Australia, April
1990.
“Rethinking Weber: A Feminist Search for Alternatives to Bureaucracy.” In L.
Smircich (chair), (Re)Visions of Organization and Management Theory from Feminist
Perspectives. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of
Management, San Francisco, August 1990.
“Deconstruction, Decision Making Theory, and Racial Politics.” In M. Fiol (chair),
Organizational Discourse as Fiction: Truth, Lies, and the Untold. Symposium
presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, San Francisco,
August 1990.
“Re-reading Weber: Searching for Feminist Alternatives to Bureaucracy.” Invited
address (Ruffin Lectures), Olsson Center for Applied Ethics, Darden Graduate School
of Business Administration, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, November
1990.
“Questioning Assumptions of Legitimacy in Distributive Justice Research.” Invited
presentation at the Social Psychology in Organizations Conference, Center for the
Advanced Study of the Behavioral Sciences, Palo Alto, CA, June 1991.
“Deconstructing Organizational Taboos: The Suppression of Gender Conflict in
Organizations” and “Reframing Organizational Culture.” Invited presentations at the
Eighth International Standing Conference on Organizational Symbolism and
Corporate Culture, Copenhagen, Denmark, June 1991.
“Delegitimation and Distributive Injustice.” Invited presentation at the Third
International Conference on Social Justice Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands, July
1991.
Four Score and Eight Years of Academy Meetings: Reflections on Designs for the
Next Century. A. Delbecq and K. Boal (chairs). Symposium presented at the annual
meeting of the Academy of Management, New Orleans, LA, August, 1992.
“A Theory of Cultural Change in Organizations.” Annual Organizational Psychology
Lecture, University of Michigan, Department of Psychology, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
April 1993.
“Culture in Organizations: Three Perspectives.” In D. Yanow (chair), Tales of the
Organizational Culture Field: Reflections on Recently Published Books. Symposium
90

presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Atlanta, GA, August
1993.
“Challenging the Myth of Organization-Wide Consensus.” Invited presentation at the
Florida International University–University of Michigan colloquium series, Miami,
Florida, November 1993.
“The Organization of Exclusion: The Institutionalization of Sex Inequality, Gendered
Faculty Jobs, and Gendered Knowledge in Organizational Theory and Research.”
Keynote address, Asilomar Conference, Monterey, CA, April 1994 and at a
colloquium, Graduate School of Business, University of California, Irvine, CA, May
1994.
Guerrillas in Our Midst: Furthering Gender Equity in Organizations. L. Bailyn and D.
Kolb (chairs). Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of
Management, Dallas, TX, August 1994.
“Power and Uncoordinated Collective Behavior” (with Debra Meyerson). Invited
presentation at the Stanford University conference on “Power, Politics, and Influence
in Organizations, Graduate School of Business, Stanford, CA., May, 1996.
“Representing Organizational Theory and Research: Learning from Struggles for
Intellectual Dominance,” (with Peter Frost). In W. Nord (chair). Representation:
Learning from an Unusual Event about Unusual Research, Symposium presented at
the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Cincinnati, OH, August, 1996.
“Managing Bounded Emotionality at the Body Shop” (with Kathy Knopoff and
Christine Beckman). In J. Martin (chair). Dismantling the Dichotomy between Public
and Private Life: Emotional and Relational Practices at Work, Symposium presented at
the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Cincinnati, OH, August, 1996.
“Deconstructing the Disappearance of Sex and Gender: Now You Say It, Now You
Don’t,” In R. Ely and D. Meyerson, Co-chairs. Armchair Feminism II: The Challenges
of Holding Onto Gender in Organizational Intervention, Symposium presented at the
annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Boston, MA, August, 1997.
“Appreciative Inquiry: An Answer to the Supposed Relativism and Political Impotence of
Post-Structuralism?” In D. Boje, Chair, Organizational Storytelling: Developments,
Debates, and New Directions, Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the
Academy of Management, Boston, MA, August, 1997.
“Power, Dissent, and Complexity: Critical and Postmodern Perspectives on
Organizational Culture,” Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, Denmark, April,
1998.
“An Alternative to Bureaucratic Impersonality and Emotional Labor: Bounded
Emotionality at The Body Shop,” Invited Address at Copenhagen Business School,

91

Denmark, May 1997; and at Lund University, Sweden, and Gothenberg University,
Sweden, May, 1998.
“Bringing Critical Views into Research,” Invited Address, Critical Management Studies
pre-convention workshop, annual meeting of the Academy of Management, San
Diego, August, 1998.
Prejudice in the Workplace (J. Martin, Facilitator). Panel presented at the annual
meeting of the Academy of Management, San Diego, August, 1998.
“Resisting Hierarchy, Division of Labor, and Impersonality at The Body Shop,
International,” in L. Greenhalgh (Chair), Communal Models of Organizations: An
Alternative to Traditional Hierarchical Models. Symposium presented at the annual
meeting of the Academy of Management, San Diego, August, 1998.
“Defining the Edges of Cultures: The Theoretical Implications of Boundary Drawing,”
Invited Faculty Lecture, Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, Denmark, April,
1998, Lund University, Sweden, May, 1998, and Gothenberg University, Sweden, May,
1998. Invited Keynote Address, annual meeting of the British Academy of
Management, Nottingham, United Kingdom, September, 1998.
“She’s Wearing a Dress But Her Feet Are On the Table: Women Working With Men,”
Invited address, Stanford University conference on Models for Diversity: The
University’s Role in Shaping an Inclusive Society,” Stanford, California, March, 1999.
“Strategies and Limitations of Collective Action for Gender Equity in Organizations,”
Invited presentation at the Conference on Gender at Work, Center for Gender in
Organizations, Simmons Graduate School of Management, Boston, June 28-29, 1999.
“Aging with Grace,” Invited presentation at the Senior Faculty Pre-Convention
Workshop, Academy of Management, Chicago, August, 1999.
“Hidden Gendered Assumptions in Organizational Theory,” in L. Krefting (Chair),
Feminism/Otherness. Symposium presented at the annual meetings of the Academy
of Management, Chicago, August, 1999.
“Strategies for Changing Gender Inequality.” Invited Address. Administrative Sciences
Association of Canada and the International Federation of Scholarly Associations of
Management, University of Quebec, Montreal, June, 2000.
“Gendered Theory and Research in Organizational Studies: The Organization of
Marginalization and Exclusion,” Invited address (Distinguished Speaker) at the annual
meetings of the Administrative Sciences Association of Canada and the International
Federation of Scholarly Associations of Management, Montreal, July, 2000.
“Outflanked, Outwitted, and Undone: Women’s Reluctance To Use ‘Hardball’ Power
Tactics,” in B. R. Ragins and E. Fagenson-Eland (Chairs), Backlash in Academia.

92

Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management,
Toronto, August, 2000.
“Retaining a Critical Edge in Organizational Research,” Invited presentation at the
Junior Faculty Pre-convention Workshop, Critical Management Studies, at the annual
meeting of the Academy of Management, Toronto, August, 2000.
“Power, Sexuality, and Ambivalence: Media Representations of Women Entrepreneurs
in US and Sweden,” (with H.J. Ahl). Invited address to International Seminar on
Gender, Entrepreneurship, and Change, Hanken (Swedish Business School), Helsinki,
Finland, October 19, 2000.
“Popular Anti-Feminism: Or, What We Can Learn from Resistance?” (with Diane
Middlebrook, English Dept.), New Colloquium on Feminist Thought, Stanford
University, April, 2001.
“Feminist Theory and Critical Theory: Unexplored Synergies,” Invited keynote
address, Rethinking Gender Conference, Keele University, Stoke on Trent, United
Kingdom, June, 2001.
“Swimming Against the Tide: Aligning Values and Work,” Invited presentation at the
pre-conference workshop on Scholars’ Journeys: Research, Renewal, and Values, (R.
Stablein, Chair), Academy of Management, Washington, D.C., August, 2001.
“Moving Toward Feminist Research,” Invited presentation at the pre-conference
workshop on Feminist Research Methodologies, (S. Case, Chair), Academy of
Management, Washington, D.C., August, 2001.
“The Dangers of Over-emphasizing Practice in the Development of Management
Research,” in the Academy of Management Award Winners’ Symposium on the
Practice of Management Knowledge, (A. van de Ven, Chair), Academy of
Management, Washington, D.C., August, 2001.
“Reconceptualizing the Boundaries of Cultures,” in E. Antonacopoulou (Chair),
Interpreting Organization as Space: Understanding Contemporary Organizations,
Academy of Management, Washington, D.C., August, 2001.
“How the Technology Industry is Gendered: From the Viewpoints of High Ranking
Women Executives (with D. Meyerson), in J. Fountain (Chair), Gender, Information,
and Technology: New Directions for Theory, Research, and Governance, Academy of
Management, Washington, D.C., August, 2001.
“Gender Equity Interventions: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why,” Invited
keynote address at a conference on Future Research in Managing Human Diversity,
Melbourne, Australia, December 11 and 12, 2001.

93

“Organizational Image and Identity: A Contested Terrain,” (with A. Flijik and M.C.
Jimenez), Invited Presentation, University of Melbourne, December 14, 2001,
Melbourne, Australia.
“Tempered Radicalism in an Academic Career,” Invited presentation, Critical
Management Studies Doctoral consortium, Academy of Management, Denver, CO,
August, 2002.
“Reproducing, transmitting, and transforming gender in Mexico,” (with O. O’Neill) in
R. Aldag (Chair), Showcase Symposium entitled ““Gender and Entrepreneurship:
Opportunity Generation, Access, Awareness, Evaluation, and Exploitation,” Academy
of Management, Seattle, August, 2003.
“Surfacing Critical Themes in Researching Organizational Culture,” Invited
presentation, P. Pushad (Chair), Critique and Ethics in Fieldwork, Research Methods
Workshop, Academy of Management, Seattle, August, 2003.
“How to Make an Important, Original Research Contribution,” Invited Presentation,
OB/OMT/ODC Junior Faculty Workshop, Academy of Management, Seattle, August,
2003.
“Management, Language and Culture,” Invited Presentation, 20th anniversary of the
Bachelor and Master Programs, Department for Intercultural Communication and
Management, Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, Denmark, April, 2004.
“Institutional Interlocks and the Perpetuation of Gender Inequalities,” (with O.
O’Neill). Invited Presentation at the university-wide “Wisdom in the Age of
Knowledge” series, Gothenberg University, Gothenberg, Sweden, April, 2004. Same
talk given in May, 2004 at Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
“Treacherous Terrain: Equity and Equality at Work and at Home,” (with D.
Meyerson). Introductory Speech at the Conference for Senior Women Executives and
the Cultures of Management, Sydney, Australia, November 29, 2004.
“Women at the Top: What It Takes To Survive and Thrive in a Male-Dominated
Executive Culture,” (with D. Meyerson), Invited address, Leadership Development for
Women Anniversary Celebration, University of Western Australia, Perth, May, 2005.
“Resistance to Gender-Related Cultural Change: A Cross-Institutional Approach,”
(with O. O’Neill), Human Resources/Industrial Relations Seminar, University of
Western Australia Business School, Perth, May, 2005.
“Why Women Quit” (with D. Meyerson). Invited address to a public meeting of Chief
Executive Women, Sheraton on Park, June 8, 2005.
“The Conspiracy of Silence” (with D. Meyerson). Invited address to the Members of
(Federal) Parliament, Canberra, Australia, June 16, 2005. (Given by A. McPhee in my
absence due to injury)
94

“Giving Voice to the Silenced: Beyond Delusions of Organizational Unity and
Harmony,” Invited address for Distinguished Scholar Lifetime Contribution Award,
Organizational and Management Theory division, Academy of Management,
Honolulu, Hawaii, August, 2005.
“Changing Research Topics” and “How to Make an Original Research Contribution,”
Invited presentations, Junior Faculty Preconvention Workshop, Organization and
Management Theory division, Academy of Management, Honolulu, Hawaii, August,
2005.
“Major Theoretical, Methodological, and Writing Difficulties in Cultural Research” and
“Cultures and Organizations: Problems and Opportunities for Future Research,” at the
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Faculty of Social Sciences, one-day seminar appraising
the impact of Professor Martin’s scholarship on academic teaching and research in the
Netherlands, October, 2005.
“Gendered Organizations,” Invited presentation at the National Academies
Convocation on Maximizing the Potential of Women in Academe, Donna Shalala
(Committee Chair), National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., December,
2005.
“Institutional Interlocks: Why Reducing Gender Inequality Is So Difficult,” (with O.
O’Neill) Invited address to the Organizational Theory, Strategy, and Gender and
Diversity divisions of the Administrative Sciences Association of Canada, Banff,
Canada, June, 2006.
“Distinguished Scholars Thesis Advice Workshop,” Organization and Management
Theory Doctoral Consortium, Academy of Management, Atlanta, GA, August, 2006.
Pre-convention workshop, CMS division: “The Uneasy Marriage Between Critical
Management Studies and Feminist Theory,” (Yvonne Benschop, Chair), Academy of
Management, Atlanta, GA, August, 2006.
“Walking the Talk: Individual and Collective Action Strategies,” Plenary Session
(William Cooke, Chair) on Critical Management Perspectives on Race and Gender,
Academy of Management, Atlanta, GA, August, 2006.
“Thinking Big: Redefining Leadership for Women,” Keynote Address, Engendering
Leadership Through Research and Practice, University of Western Australia, Perth,
July 22, 2008.
“Gender: Yesterday’s Issue or Hidden Conflict?” Invited address, Women Executives
of Perth, University of Western Australia Business School, July 25, 2008.
“A Hidden Conflict between Feminist Theory and the Practicalities of Reducing
Gender Inequality,” in Hidden Conflicts in Organizations -- Revisited” (L. Putnam,
Chair), Academy of Management joint symposium, Anaheim, CA, August, 2008.
95

The Next 25 Years of Gender, Diversity, and Organizations Research: A Special Panel
in Honor of GDO’s 25th Anniversary. (J. Martin, Chair), Academy of Management
Symposium, Chicago, August, 2009.
“Dreams and Realities of Beach House Life in Hawaii,” Facing the Transition to
Retirement: Now What? (R. Ford, Chair), Academy of Management Symposium,
Chicago, August, 2009.
“Beyond Transformation-lite: The Feminist Theory: Planned Change Disconnect”
with Y. Benchop in Y. Benchop (chair), The Potential of Critical Gender and Diversity
Studies for Organizational Change, Academy of Management Showcase Symposium,
Montreal, Canada, August, 2010.
OTHER COLLOQUIA AND OTHER INVITED ADDRESSES:
Psychology Department and the Graduate School of Business, University of California
at Berkeley;
School of Organization and Management, Yale University;
Departments of Psychology and Sociology, Stanford University;
Institute for Poverty Research, University of Wisconsin at Madison;
Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
School of Business, University of Southern California;
School of Business, University of Illinois;
Psychology Department, University of California at Santa Cruz;
Harvard Business School;
Department of Psychology, Business School, and ICOS, University of Michigan at
Ann Arbor;
Department of Psychology, Harvard University;
Graduate School of Business, University of California at Los Angeles;
School of Business, Southern Methodist University;
School of Business, University of Texas at Austin;
Faculty of Commerce, University of British Columbia;
Australian Graduate School of Management, University of New South Wales;
Department of Psychology, Sydney University, Australia;
School of Business, University of Otago, New Zealand;
University of Michigan–Florida International University joint colloquium series,
Miami, Florida;
School of Business, University of California at Irvine;
Annenberg School of Communication, University of Southern California;
Copenhagen Business School, Denmark;
Lund University, Sweden;
Gothenberg University, Sweden;
University of Melbourne;
University of Technology at Sydney, Australia
November, 2010

96

Index
Admati, Anat R.
Anthropology
Awards
Babcock, Barbara
Bush, George H. W.
Bush, George W.
Casper, Gerhard
Clayman Institute for Gender Research (formally CROW)
Conley, Frances “Fran” K.
Crocker, Jennifer “Jenny”
Daycare centers
Education
Efron, Bradley “Brad”
Faculty Advisory Board
Fiske, Susan T.
Gender research
Hall, Francine
Harvard University
Honorary doctorate
Howell, James “Jim”
Justice and inequality
Kennedy, Donald “Don”
Keohane, Nannerl “Nan” O.
Martin, Joanne
Martin, Linda Ashton
Martin, Richard Drake
Master of Business Administration (MBA)
McBer and Company
McNichols, Maureen
Mentoring

97

Middlebrook, Diane, 1939-2007
Organizational culture
Ouchi, William “Bill” G.
Pay inequality
Peters, Tom
Pettigrew, Tom
PhD Research
Psychology
Reist, Paul
Rhode, Deborah L.
Rice, Condoleezza
Ridgeway, Cecilia
Sexism
Sexual assault and harassment
Sheil, Beau
Smith College
Stanford University
Stanford University – Graduate School of Business
Stanford University – Graduate School of Business - Doctoral programs
Strober, Myra H.
Taylor, Shelley E.
Tenure
Tversky, Amos
Waterman, Robert
Weiss, Janet
Wilkins, Alan
Women’s Faculty Caucus

98

